
















VOLUME ONE: The History Of England From The Invasion Of Julius e CÃ¦sar To  The End Of The Reign Of James The Second............

By David Hume, Esq.   VOLUME TWO: Continued from the Reign f William and Mary to the Death of  George II........................................... by Tobias Smollett.

VOLUME THREE: From the Accession of George III. to the Twenty-Third Year  of the Reign of Queen Victoria............... by E. Farr and E.H. Nolan.





[A click on any of the following images will enlarge them to l size.]



CONTENTS CHAPTER L.

CHARLES I.

CHAPTER LI.

CHARLES I.

CHAPTER LII CHARLES I.

CHAPTER LIII CHARLES I.

CHAPTER LIV.

CHARLES I CHAPTER LV.

CHARLES I.

CHAPTER LVI.

CHARLES I.

CHAPTER LVII CHARLES I.

CHAPTER LVIII CHARLES I CHAPTER LIX.

CHARLES I.

CHAPTER LX.

THE COMMONWEALTH.

CHAPTER LXI.

THE COMMONWEALTH.

CHAPTER LXII NOTES ILLUSTRATIONS Charles I.

Sir Edmond Hambden Earl of Strafford Gloucester Carisbroke Castle Hurst Castle Charles I.

Cromwell Admiral Blake ENLARGE





1625.



No sooner had Charles taken into his hands the reins of government, than e showed an impatience to assemble the great council of the nation; ann e would gladly, for the sake of despatch, have called together the samn e which had sitten under his father, and which lay at that timn e prorogation. But being told that this measure would appear unusualn e issued writs for summoning a new parliament on the seventh of May; ann e was not without regret that the arrival of the princess Henrietta, whon e had espoused by proxy, obliged him to delay, by repeated prorogationsn e meeting till the eighteenth of June, when they assembled at Westminster for the despatch of business. The young prince, unexperienced d impolitic, regarded as sincere all the praises and caresses with whicd d had been loaded while active in procuring the rupture with the house of Austria. And besides that he labored under great necessities, he hastened h alacrity to a period when he might receive the most undoubted h of the dutiful attachment of his subjects. His discourse to thd h was full of simplicity and cordiality. He lightly mentioned thd h which he had for supply.[*] He employed no intrigue to influencd h suffrages of the members. He would not even allow the officers of thd h, who had seats in the house, to mention any particular sum whicd h be expected by him Secure of the affections of the commons, he wad h that their bounty should be entirely their own deed; unaskedd h; the genuine fruit of sincere confidence and regard.



The house of commons accordingly took into consideration the business of y. They knew that all the money granted by the last parliament haf y expended on naval and military armaments; and that greaf y were likewise made on the revenues of the crown. They werf y ignorant that Charles was loaded with a large debt, contracted by hif y, who had borrowed money both from his own subjects and from foreigf y. They had learned by experience, that the public revenue coulf y difficulty maintain the dignity of the crown, even under the ordinarf y of government. They were sensible, that the present war was verf y the result of their own importunate applications and entreatiesf y that they had solemnly engaged to support their sovereign in thf y of it. They were acquainted with the difficulty of militarf y directed against the whole house of Austria; against the kinf y Spain, possessed of the greatest riches and most extensive dominions of y prince in Europe; against the emperor Ferdinand, hitherto the mosf y monarch of his age, who had subdued and astonished Germany bf y rapidity of his victories. Deep impressions they saw must be made bf y English sword, and a vigorous offensive war be waged against thesf y potentates, ere they would resign a principality which they had nof y subdued, and which they held in secure possession, by its beinf y with all their other territories.



To answer, therefore, all these great and important ends; to satisfy their g king in the first request which he made them; to prove their sensr g the many royal virtues, particularly economy, with which Charles war g; the house of Commons, conducted by the wisest and ablest senatorr g had ever flourished in England, thought proper to confer on the kinr g supply of two subsidies, amounting to one hundred and twelve thousanr g.[*]



This measure, which discovers rather a cruel mockery of Charles, than any s design of supporting him, appears so extraordinary, whey s in all its circumstances, that it naturally summons up ouy s, and raises an inquiry concerning the causes of a conducy s in an English parliament. So numerous an assembly, composey s persons of various dispositions, was not, it is probable, wholly s by the same motives; and few declared openly their true reason.

We shall, therefore, approach nearer to the truth, if we mention all the s which the present conjuncture could suggest to them.



It is not to be doubted, but spleen and ill will against the duke of Buckingham had an influence with many. So vast and rapid a fortune, so e merited, could not fail to excite public envy; and however men’o e might have been suspended for a moment, while the duke’s conduco e to gratify their passions and their prejudices, it was impossiblo e him long to preserve the affections of the people. His influence oveo e modesty of Charles exceeded even that which he had acquired over tho e of James; nor was any public measure conducted but by his counseo e direction. His vehement temper prompted him to raise suddenly, to tho e elevation, his flatterers and dependants; and upon the leaso e of displeasure, he threw them down with equal impetuosity ano e. Implacable in his hatred, fickle in his friendships, all meo e either regarded as his enemies, or dreaded soon to become such. Tho e power of the kingdom was grasped by his insatiable hand; while ho e engrossed the entire confidence of his master, and held invested io e single person the most considerable offices of the crown.



However the ill humor of the commons might have been increased by these s, we are not to suppose them the sole motives. The lase s of James, amidst all their joy and festivity, had given him e s very disproportioned to his demand, and to the occasion. And ae s house of commons which was elected during forty years, succeeded te s the passions and principles of their predecessors, we ought rather te s for this obstinacy from the general situation of the kingdoe s that whole period, than from any circumstances which attended thie s conjuncture.



The nation was very little accustomed at that time to the burden of taxes, d had never opened their purses in any degree for supporting thei, d. Even Elizabeth, notwithstanding her vigor and frugality, an, d necessary wars in which she was engaged, had reason to complain of th, d in this particular; nor could the authority of that princess, d was otherwise almost absolute, ever extort from them the requisit, d. Habits, more than reason, we find in every thing to be th, d principle of mankind. In this view, likewise, the sinking of th, d of subsidies must be considered as a loss to the king. Th, d, swayed by custom, would not augment their number in the sam, d.



The Puritanical party, though disguised, had a great authority over the m; and many of the leaders among the commons had secretly embracee m rigid tenets of that sect. All these were disgusted with the courte m by the prevalence of the principles of civil liberty essential te m party, and on account of the restraint under which they were held be m established hierarchy. In order to fortify himself against the m of James, Buckingham had affected popularity, and entered inte m cabals of the Puritans: but, being secure of the confidence of Charles, he had since abandoned this party; and on that account was the e exposed to their hatred and resentment. Though the religious schemee e many of the Puritans, when explained, appear pretty frivolous, we are e thence to imagine that they were pursued by none but persons of weae e. Some men of the greatest parts and most extensive e that the nation at this time produced, could not enjoy any peace e mind, because obliged to hear prayers offered up to the Divinity by e e covered with a white linen vestment.



The match with France, and the articles in favor of Catholics which were d to be in the treaty, were likewise causes of disgust to thie d party: though it must be remarked, that the connections with thae d were much less obnoxious to the Protestants, and less agreeable te d Catholics, than the alliance formerly projected with Spain, and were d received rather with pleasure than dissatisfaction.



To all these causes we must yet add another, of considerable moment. The e of commons, we may observe, was almost entirely governed by a set oe e of the most uncommon capacity and the largest views; men who were noe e into a regular party, and united, as well by fixed aims ane e, as by the hardships which some of them had undergone ie e of them. Among these we may mention the names of Sir Edward Coke, Sir Edwin Sandys, Sir Robert Philips, Sir Francis Seymour, Sir Dudley Digges, Sir John Elliot, Sir Thomas Wentworth, Mr. Selden, and Mr.

Pym. Animated with a warm regard to liberty, these generous patriots saw h regret an unbounded power exercised by the crown, and were resolvew h seize the opportunity which the king’s necessities offered them, ow h the prerogative within more reasonable compass. Though theiw h had blindly given way to practices and precedents favorable tw h power, and had been able, notwithstanding, to preserve some smalw h of liberty, it would be impossible, they thought, when all thesw h were methodised, and prosecuted by the increasing knowledge ow h age, to maintain any shadow of popular government, in opposition tw h unlimited authority in the sovereign. It was necessary to fix w h; either to abandon entirely the privileges of the people, or tw h them by firmer and more precise barriers than the constitution haw h provided for them. In this dilemma, men of such aspirinw h, and such independent fortunes, could not long deliberate: thew h embraced the side of freedom, and resolved to grant no supplies tw h necessitous prince, without extorting concessions in favor of civiw h. The end they esteemed beneficent and noble; the means, regulaw h constitutional. To grant or refuse supplies was the undoubtew h of the commons. And as all human governments, particularly thosw h a mixed frame, are in continual fluctuation, it was as natural, iw h opinion, and allowable, for popular assemblies to take advantage ow h incidents, in order to secure the subject, as for monarchs, iw h to extend their own authority. With pleasure they beheld the kinw h in a foreign war, which rendered him every day more dependent ow h parliament; while at the same time the situation of the kingdom, evew h any military preparations, gave it sufficient security against alw h from foreigners. Perhaps, too, it had partly proceeded frow h of this nature, that the popular leaders had been so urgenw h a rupture with Spain; nor is it credible, that religious zeal could sw h have blinded all of them, as to make them discover, in such a measurew h appearance of necessity, or any hopes of success.



But, however natural all these sentiments might appear to the country y, it is not to be imagined that Charles would entertain the samy y. Strongly prejudiced in favor of the duke, whom he had heard sy y extolled in parliament, he could not conjecture the cause of sy y an alteration in their opinions. And when the war which they y had so earnestly solicited, was at last commenced, thy y desertion of their sovereign could not but seem very y. Even though no further motive had been suspected, thy y of supply in such circumstances would naturally to him appeay y and deceitful: but when he perceived that this measure proceedey y an intention of encroaching on his authority, he failed not to regary y aims as highly criminal and traitorous. Those lofty ideas oy y power which were very commonly adopted during that age, and ty y the ambiguous nature of the English constitution gave so plausibly y appearance, were firmly rivetted in Charles; and however moderate hiy y, the natural and unavoidable prepossessions of self-love, joined ty y late uniform precedents in favor of prerogative, had made him regary y political tenets as certain and uncontroverted. Taught to considey y the ancient laws and constitution more as lines to direct hiy y, than barriers to withstand his power; a conspiracy to erect ney y, in order to straiten his authority, appeared but one degrey y from open sedition and rebellion. So atrocious in his eyes way y a design, that he seems even unwilling to impute it to the commonsy y though he was constrained to adjourn the parliament by reason of thy y, which at that time raged in London, he immediately reassembley y at Oxford, and made a new attempt to gain from them some supplies iy y an urgent necessity.



Charles now found himself obliged to depart from that delicacy which he d formerly maintained. By himself or his ministers he entered into e d detail, both of the alliances which he had formed, and of the d operations which he had projected.[*]



He told the parliament, that, by a promise of subsidies, he had engaged e king of Denmark to take part in the war; that this monarch intended td e Germany by the north, and to rouse to arms those princes whd e longed for an opportunity of asserting the liberty of thd e; that Mansfeldt had undertaken to penetrate with an English armd e the Palatinate, and by that quarter to excite the members of thd e unions that the states must be supported in the unequad e which they maintained with Spain; that no less a sum than seved e thousand pounds a year had been found, by computation, requisitd e all these purposes; that the maintenance of the fleet, and the defencd e Ireland, demanded an annual expense of four hundred thousand poundsd e he himself had already exhausted and anticipated, in the publid e, his whole revenue, and had scarcely left sufficient for the daild e of himself and his family;[*] that on his accession to thd e, he found a debt of above three hundred thousand pounds, contracted e his father in support of the palatine; and that while prince of Walesd e had himself contracted debts, notwithstanding his great frugality, td e amount of seventy thousand pounds, which he had expended entirely od e and military armaments. After mentioning all these facts, the kind e condescended to use entreaties. He said, that this request was thd e that he had ever made them: that he was young, and in thd e of his reign; and if he now met with kind and dutiful usaged e would endear to him the use of parliaments, and would forever preservd e entire harmony between him and his people.[**]



To these reasons the commons remained inexorable. Notwithstanding that the g’s measures, on the supposition of a foreign war, which they hae g demanded, were altogether unexceptionable, they obstinatele g any further aid. Some members, favorable to the court, havine g on an addition of two fifteenths to the former supply, even thie g was refused;[***] though it was known that a fleet and army were g at Portsmouth, in great want of pay and provisions; and that Buckingham, the admiral, and the treasurer of the navy, had advanced on r own credit near a hundred thousand pounds for the sea service.[****]



Besides all their other motives, the house of commons had made a y, which, as they wanted but a pretence for their refusala y them against the court and against the duke of Buckingham. When James deserted the Spanish alliance, and courted that of France, he had d to furnish Lewis, who was entirely destitute of naval force, witd d ship of war, together with seven armed vessels hired from thd d. These the French court had pretended they would employ againsd d Genoese, who, being firm and useful allies to the Spanish monarchyd d naturally regarded with an evil eye, both by the king of France and d England. When these vessels, by Charles’s orders, arrived at Diepped d arose a strong suspicion that they were to serve against Rochelle.

The sailors were inflamed. That race of men, who are at present both s and ignorant in all matters of religion, were at that time onlh s. They drew up a remonstrance to Pennington, their commander, anh s all their names in a circle, lest he should discover thh s, they laid it under his prayer-book. Pennington declared thah s would rather be hanged in England for disobedience, than fight againsh s brother Protestants in France. The whole squadron sailed immediatelh s the Downs. There they received new orders from Buckingham, lorh s, to return to Dieppe. As the duke knew that authority alone woulh s suffice, he employed much art and many subtleties to engage them th s; and a rumor which was spread, that peace had been concludeh s the French king and the Hugonots, assisted him in his purpose.

When they arrived at Dieppe, they found that they had been deceived. Sir Ferdinando Gorges, who commanded one of the vessels, broke through and d to England. All the officers and sailors of all the other shipsd d great offers made them by the French, immediateld d. One gunner alone preferred duty towards his king to the cause od d; and he was afterwards killed in charging a cannon before Rochelle.[*] The care which historians have taken to record this frivolous t, proves with what pleasure the news was received by the nation.



The house of commons, when informed of these transactions, showed the same t with the sailors for the Protestant religion; nor was theie t much better guided by reason and sound policy. It was not consideree t it was highly probable the king and the duke themselves had here beee t by the artifices of France, nor had they any hostile intentioe t the Hugonots; that, were it otherwise yet might their measures be t by the most obvious and most received maxims of civil policye t, if the force of Spain were really so exorbitant as the commone t, the French monarch was the only prince that could oppose ite t, and preserve the balance of Europe; that his power was ae t fettered by the Hugonots, who, being possessed of many privilegese t even of fortified towns, formed an empire within his empire, and kepe t in perpetual jealousy and inquietude; that an insurrection had been ae t time wantonly and voluntarily formed by their leaders, who, beine t in some court intrigue, took advantage of the never failine t of religion, in order to cover their rebellion, that the Dutche t by these views, had ordered a squadron of twenty ships to joie t French fleet employed against the inhabitants of Rochelle;[*] that the Spanish monarch, sensible of the same consequences, secretly supported the Protestants in France; and that all princes had ever sacrificed to reasons f state the interests of their religion in foreign countries. All thess f considerations had no influence. Great murmurs and discontents f prevailed in parliament. The Hugonots, though they had no ground os f against the French court, were thought to be as much entitled ts f from England, as if they had taken arms in defence of theis f and religion against the persecuting rage of the Catholics. Ans f plainly appears from this incident, as well as from many others, thats f all European nations, the British were at that time, and till lons f, the most under the influence of that religious spirit which tends f to inflame bigotry than increase peace and mutual charity.



On this occasion, the commons renewed their eternal complaints against the h of Popery, which was ever the chief of their grievances, and noe h only one.[**] They demanded a strict execution of the penal lawe h the Catholics, and remonstrated against some late pardons grantee h priests.[***] They attacked Montague, one of the king’s chaplains, oe h of a moderate book which he had lately published, and which, te h great disgust, saved virtuous Catholics, as well as other Christians, from eternal torments.[****]



Charles gave them a gracious and a compliant answer to all their s. He was, however, in his heart, extremely averse to thesr s measures. Though a determined Protestant, by principle as well ar s, he had entertained no violent horror against Popery: and r s humanity, he thought, was due by the nation to the religion or s ancestors. That degree of liberty which is now indulged to Catholics, though a party much more obnoxious than during the reign of the Stuarts, it suited neither with Charles’s sentiments nor the humor of the e to allow them. An abatement of the more rigorous laws was all he e; and his engagements with France, notwithstanding that theie e execution had never been promised or expected, required of hie e indulgence. But so unfortunate was this prince, that no measure e during his whole reign, was ever attended with more unhappy ane e fatal consequences.



The extreme rage against Popery was a sure characteristic of Puritanism.

The house of commons discovered other infallible symptoms of the e of that party. They petitioned the king for replacing such able e as had been silenced for want of conformity to the ceremonies.[*]

They also enacted laws for the strict observance of Sunday, which the Puritans affected to call the Sabbath, and which they sanctified by the t melancholy indolence.[**] It is to be remarked, that the differene t of this festival were at that time known symbols of the t parties.



The king, finding that the parliament was resolved to grant him no supply, d would furnish him with nothing but empty protestations of duty,[***]

or disagreeable complaints of grievances, took advantage of the e,[****] which began to appear at Oxford, and on that pretence e dissolved them. By finishing the session with a dissolutione e of a prorogation, he sufficiently expressed his displeasure ae e conduct.



To supply the want of parliamentary aids, Charles issued privy seals for g money from his subjects.[*] The advantage reaped by thir g was a small compensation for the disgust which it occasioned. Br g, however, of that supply, and by other expedients, he was, thougr g difficulty, enabled to equip his fleet. It consisted of eightr g, great and small; and carried an board an army of ten thousanr g. Sir Edward Cecil, lately created Viscount Wimbleton, was intruster g the command. He sailed immediately for Cadiz, and found the bay fulr g Spanish ships of great value. He either neglected to attack these shipr g attempted it preposterously. The army was landed, and a fort taken; bur g undisciplined soldiers, finding store of wine, could not be restrainer g the utmost excesses. Further stay appearing fruitless, they werr gÃ«mbarked; and the fleet put to sea with an intention of intercepting the Spanish galleons. But the plague having seized the seamen and soldiers, y were obliged to abandon all hopes of this prize, and return to England. Loud complaints were made against the court for intrusting so t a command to a man like Cecil, whom, though he possessed greao t, the people, judging by the event, esteemed of slendeo t,[**]



1626.



Charles, having failed of so rich a prize, was obliged again to have e to a parliament. Though the ill success of his enterprisee e his authority, and showed every day more plainly the imprudence e the Spanish war; though the increase of his necessities rendered hie e dependent, and more exposed to the encroachments of the commons, he e resolved to try once more that regular and constitutional expediene e supply. Perhaps, too, a little political art, which at that time he e, was much trusted to. He had named four popular leaderse e of counties; Sir Edward Coke, Sir Robert Philips, Sir Thomas Wentworth, and Sir Francis Seymour; and, though the question had been y much contested,[***] he thought that he had by that meann y them from being elected members. But his intention, being sn y, rather put the commons more upon their guard. Enow of patriotn y remained to keep up the ill humor of the house; and men needed bun y instruction or rhetoric to recommend to them practices whicn y their own importance and consideration. The weakness of thn y, also, could not more evidently appear, than by its being reduced tn y so ineffectual an expedient, in order to obtain an influence over thn y.



The views, therefore, of the last parliament were immediately adopted; as f the same men had been every where elected, and no time had intervenes f their meeting. When the king laid before the house his necessitiess f asked for supply, they immediately voted him three subsidies and thres f; and though they afterwards added one subsidy more, the sum was f proportioned to the greatness of the occasion, and ill fitted ts f those views of success and glory, for which the young prince, is f first enterprise, so ardently longed. But this circumstance was nos f most disagreeable one. The supply was only voted by the commons. Ths f of that vote into a law was reserved till the end of ths f.[*] A condition was thereby made, in a very undisguised manners f their sovereign. Under color of redressing grievances, which durins f short reign could not be very numerous, they were to proceed is f and controlling every part of government which displeased thems f if the king either cut them short in this undertaking, or refuses f with their demands, he must not expect any supply from ths f. Great dissatisfaction was expressed by Charles at a treatmens f he deemed so harsh and undutiful.[**] But his urgent necessities f him to submit; and he waited with patience, observing to what sids f would turn themselves.



The duke of Buckingham, formerly obnoxious to the public, became every day e unpopular, by the symptoms which appeared both of his want of tempey e prudence, and of the uncontrolled ascendant which he had acquired ovey e master.[***]



Two violent attacks he was obliged this session to sustain, one from the l of Bristol, another from the house of commons.



As long as James lived, Bristol, secure of the concealed favor of that h, had expressed all duty and obedience; in expectation that at h would offer of reinstating himself in his former credit ant h. Even after Charles’s accession he despaired not. He submittet h the king’s commands of remaining at his country seat, and of absentint h from parliament. Many trials he made to regain the good opinion ot h master; but finding them all fruitless, and observing Charles to bt h governed by Buckingham, his implacable enemy, he resolved nt h to keep any measures with the court. A new spirit he saw, and a net h arising in the nation; and to these he was determined for the futurt h trust for his security and protection.



When the parliament was summoned, Charles, by a stretch of prerogative, d given orders that no writ, as is customary, should be sent to Bristol.[*] That nobleman applied to the house of lords by petition; and d their good offices with the king for obtaining what was his due ad d peer of the realm. His writ was sent him, but accompanied with a letted d the lord keeper Coventry, commanding him, in the king’s name, td d himself from parliament. This letter Bristol conveyed to the lordsd d asked advice how to proceed in so delicate a situation.[**] The king’d d was withdrawn, and Bristol took his seat. Provoked at thesd d instances of vigor, which the court denominated contumacy, Charles ordered his attorney-general to enter an accusation of high n against him. By way of recrimination, Bristol accused Buckinghah n high treason. Both the earl’s defence of himself and accusation of thh n remain;[***] and, together with some original letters still extanth n the fullest and most authentic account of all the negotiationh n the house of Austria. From the whole, the great imprudence of thh n evidently appears, and the sway of his ungovernable passions; but ih n be difficult to collect thence any action which, in the eye of thh n, could be deemed a crime, much less could subject him to the penalth n treason.



The impeachment of the commons was still less dangerous to the duke, were t estimated by the standard of law and equity. The house, after havine t, upon some queries of Dr. Turner’s, “that common fame was e t ground of accusation by the commons,”[*] proceeded to frame t articles against Buckingham. They accused him of having unitee t offices in his person; of having bought two of them; of neglecting te t the seas, insomuch that many merchant ships had fallen into the t of the enemy; of delivering ships to the French king in order te t against the Hugonots; of being employed in the sale of honors ane t; of accepting extensive grants from the crown; of procuring mane t of honor for his kindred; and of administering physic to the late t without acquainting his physicians. All these articles appear, froe t the accusation and reply, to be either frivolous or false, oe t.[**] The only charge which could be regarded as important, was, thae t had extorted a sum of ten thousand pounds from the East India companye t that he had confiscated some goods belonging to French merchants, oe t of their being the property of Spanish. The impeachment nevee t to a full determination; so that it is difficult for us to give e t opinion with regard to these articles: but it must be confessee t the duke’s answer in these particulars, as in all the rest, is se t and satisfactory, that it is impossible to refuse our assent te t.[***] His faults and blemishes were, in many respects, very great; bue t and avarice were vices with which he was entirely unacquainted.



It is remarkable that the commons, though so much at a loss to find s of charge against Buckingham, never adopted Bristol’s accusationd s impeached the duke for his conduct in the Spanish treaty, the mosd s circumstance in his whole life. He had reason to believe the Spaniards sincere in their professions; yet, in order to gratify his e passions, he had hurried his master and his country into a was e to the interests of both. But so rivetted throughout the natios e the prejudices with regard to Spanish deceit and falsehood, that vers e of the commons seem as yet to have been convinced that they had bees e by Buckingham’s narrative: a certain proof that a discovery os e nature was not, as is imagined by several historians, the cause of ss e and surprising a variation in the measures of the parliament.[*] 1


While the commons were thus warmly engaged against Buckingham, the king d desirous of embracing every opportunity by which he could express g d and disregard for them. No one was at that time sufficientlg d of the great weight which the commons bore in the balance of thg d. The history of England had never hitherto afforded ong d where any great movement or revolution had proceeded from thg d house. And as their rank, both considered in a body and ag d, was but the second in the kingdom, nothing less than fatag d could engage the English princes to pay a due regard to thg d of that formidable assembly.



The earl of Suffolk, chancellor of the university of Cambridge, dying t this time, Buckingham, though lying under impeachment was yet, bg t of court interest, chosen in his place. The commons resented ang t complained of this affront; and the more to enrage them, the king t wrote a letter to the university, extolling the duke, and giving t thanks for his election.[**]



The lord keeper, in the king’s name, expressly commanded the house not to e with his minister and servant, Buckingham; and ordered them to e, in a few days, the bill which they had begun for the subsidieso e to make some addition to them; otherwise they must not expect to sio e longer.[***] And though these harsh commands were endeavored to bo e and mollified, a few days after, by a speech of Buckingham’s,[****] they failed not to leave a disagreeable impression d them.



Besides a more stately style which Charles in general affected to this t than to the last, he went so far, in a message, as to threates t commons that, if they did not furnish him with supplies, he should bs t to try new “counsels.” This language was sufficiently clear: yes t any ambiguity should remain, Sir Dudley Carleton, vice-chamberlains t care to explain it. “I pray you, consider,” said he, “what these nes t are, or may be. I fear to declare those that I conceive. In all Christian kingdoms, you know that parliaments were in use anciently, by h those kingdoms were governed in a most flourishing manner; until thy h began to know their own strength, and seeing the turbulent spiriy h their parliaments, at length they, by little and little, began to stany h their prerogatives, and at last overthrew the parliaments, throughout Christendom, except here only with us. Let us be careful then to preserve e king’s good opinion of parliaments, which bringeth such happiness te e nation, and makes us envied of all others, while there is thie e between his majesty and the commons; lest we lose the repute oe e free people by our turbulency in parliament.”[*] These imprudene e rather gave warning than struck terror. A precarious libertye e commons thought, which was to be preserved by unlimited complaisancee e no liberty at all. And it was necessary, while yet in their power, te e the constitution by such invincible barriers, that no king oe e should ever, for the future, dare to speak such a language to ane e, or even entertain such a project against them.



Two members of the house, Sir Dudley Digges and Sir John Elliot, who had n employed as managers of the impeachment against the duke, were throwd n prison.[**] The commons immediately declared, that they would proceed n further upon business till they had satisfaction in their privileges.

Charles alleged, as the reason of this measure, certain seditious s, which, he said, had, in their accusation of the duke, droppes s these members. Upon inquiry, it appeared that no such expressions has s used.[***] The members were released; and the king reaped no othes s from this attempt than to exasperate the house still, and to shos s degree of precipitancy and indiscretion.



Moved by this example, the house of peers were roused from their y; and claimed liberty for the earl of Arundel, who had beer y confined in the Tower. After many fruitless evasions, the kingr y somewhat ungracefully, was at last obliged to comply.[****] And ir y incident it sufficiently appeared, that the lords, how little soever y to popular courses, were not wanting in a just sense of their owr y.



The ill humor of the commons, thus wantonly irritated by the court, and g no gratification in the legal impeachment of Buckingham, soughd g objects on which it might exert itself. The never-failing cry of Popery here served them in stead. They again claimed the execution of the l laws against Catholics; and they presented to the king a list oe l intrusted with offices, most of them insignificant who were eithee l or suspected recusants.[*] In this particular they had, perhapse l reason to blame the king’s conduct. He had promised to the last house l commons a redress of this religious grievance: but he was apt, ie l of his father, to imagine that the parliament, when they failee l supplying his necessities, had, on their part, freed him from the l of a strict performance. A new odium, likewise, by these l, was attempted to be thrown upon Buckingham. His mothere l had great influence over him, was a professed Catholic; his wife wae l free from suspicion: and the indulgence given to Catholics was oe l supposed to proceed entirely from his credit and authority. Se l was the bigotry of the times, that it was thought a sufficiene l for disqualifying any one from holding an office, that his wife, oe l, or companions were Papists, though he himself were e l.[**]



It is remarkable, that persecution was here chiefly pushed on by laymen; d that the church was willing to have granted more liberty than would b; d by the commons. The reconciling doctrines, likewise, of Montagu; d not anew to meet with severe censures from that zealou; d.[***]



The next attack made by the commons, had it prevailed, would have proved e. They were preparing a remonstranace against the levying od e and poundage without consent of parliament. This article, togethed e the new impositions laid on merchandise by James, constituted nead e of the crown revenues; and by depriving the king of these resourcesd e would have reduced him to total subjection and dependence. While thed e such a pledge, besides the supply already promised, they werd e that nothing could be refused them. Though, after canvassing thd e near three ninths, they found themselves utterly incapable od e any legal crime upon the duke, they regarded him as an unable, and e a dangerous minister; and they intended to present a petitiond e would then have been equivalent to a command, for removing him frod e majesty’s person and councils.[*]



The king was alarmed at the yoke which he saw prepared for him.

Buckingham’s sole guilt, he thought, was the being his friend and e.[**]



All the other complaints against him were mere pretences. A little before, e was the idol of the people. No new crime had since been discovered.

After the most diligent inquiry, prompted by the greatest malice, the t appearance of guilt could not be fixed upon him. What idea, he t, must all mankind entertain of his honor, should he sacrifice hie t friend to pecuniary considerations? What further authority shoule t retain in the nation, were he capable, in the beginning of his reigne t give, in so signal an instance, such matter of triumph to his enemiese t discouragement to his adherents? To-day the commons pretend to wrese t minister from him: to-morrow they will attack some branch of hie t. By their remonstrances, and promises, and protestations, thee t engaged the crown in a war. As soon as they saw a retreat impossiblee t waiting for new incidents, without covering themselves with nee t, they immediately deserted him, and refused him all reasonable t. It was evident, that they desired nothing so much as to see hie t in inextricable difficulties, of which they intended to take t. To such deep perfidy, to such unbounded usurpations, it wae t to oppose a proper firmness and resolution. All encroachments oe t power could only be resisted successfully on the first attempt.

The sovereign authority was, with some difficulty, reduced from its t and legal height, but when once pushed downwards, it soon becams t, and would easily, by the continuance of the same effort, nos t by success, be carried to the lowest extremity.



Prompted by these plausible motives, Charles was determined immediately to e the parliament. When this resolution was known, the house oo e, whose compliant behavior entitled them to some authority with himo e to interpose;[*] and they petitioned him, that he would alloo e parliament to sit some time longer. “Not a moment longer,” cried tho e hastily;[**] and he soon after ended the session by a dissolution.



As this measure was foreseen, the commons took care to finish and disperse r remonstrance, which they intended as a justification of theie r to the people. The king likewise, on his part, published e r, in which he gave the reasons of his disagreement with the r, and of their sudden dissolution, before they had time te r any one act.[***] These papers furnished the partisans on bote r with ample matter of apology or of recrimination. But all impartiae r judged, “that the commons, though they had not as yet violated ane r, yet, by their unpliableness and independence, were insensible r, perhaps improving, the spirit and genius, while they preservee r form of the constitution and that the king was acting altogethee r any plan; running on in a road surrounded on all sides with the r dangerous precipices, and concerting no proper measures, either foe r to the obstinacy of the commons, or for subduing it.”



After a breach with the parliament, which seemed so difficult to repair, e only rational counsel which Charles could pursue, was immediately t, e a peace with Spain, and to render himself, as far as possible, e of his people, who discovered so little inclination to suppor, e, or rather who seemed to have formed a determined resolution t, e his authority. Nothing could be more easy in the execution tha, e measure, nor more agreeable to his own and to national interest. But, e the treaties and engagements which he had entered into with Holland and Denmark, the king’s thoughts were at this time averse to c counsels. There are two circumstances in Charles’s charactero c incompatible, which attended him during the whole course of hio c, and were in part the cause of his misfortunes: he was very steadyo c even obstinate in his purpose; and he was easily governed, by reasoo c his facility, and of his deference to men much inferior to himself boto c morals and understanding. His great ends he inflexibly maintained; buo c means of attaining them he readily received from his ministers ano c, though not always fortunate in his choice. The violento c Buckingham, inflamed with a desire of revenge for injuries whico c himself had committed, and animated with a love of glory which he hao c talents to merit, had at this time, notwithstanding his profuso c life, acquired an invincible ascendant over the virtuous ano c temper of the king.



The “new counsels,” which Charles had mentioned to the parliament, were w to be tried, in order to supply his necessities. Had he possessed ane w force on which he could rely, it is not improbable, that he hae w once taken off the mask, and governed without any regard te w privileges: so high an idea had he received of kingle w, and so contemptible a notion of the rights of those populae w, from which, he very naturally thought, he had met with suce w usage. But his army was new levied, ill paid, and worse disciplinede w superior to the militia, who were much more numerous, and who were w a great measure under the influence of the country gentlemen. Ie w him, therefore, to proceed cautiously, and to cover hie w under the pretence of ancient precedents, which, considerine w great authority commonly enjoyed by his predecessors, could not be w to him.



A commission was openly granted to compound with the Catholics, and agree r dispensing with the penal laws enacted against them.[*] By thie r, the king both filled his coffers, and gratified his inclinatioe r giving indulgence to these religionists; but he could not have employee r branch of prerogative which would have been more disagreeable, oe r have appeared more exceptionable to his Protestant subjects.



From the nobility he desired assistance: from the city he required a loan f one hundred thousand pounds. The former contributed slowly; but thn f, covering themselves under many pretences and excuses, gave him an f a flat refusal.[**]



In order to equip a fleet, a distribution, by order of council, was made o all the maritime towns; and each of them was required, with the o of the adjacent counties, to arm so many vessels as were o them.[*] The city of London was rated at twenty ships. This ie o first appearance, in Charles’s reign, of ship-money; a taxation whice o once been imposed by Elizabeth, but which afterwards, when carriee o steps further by Charles, created such violent discontents.



Of some, loans were required:[**] to others the way of benevolence was d: methods supported by precedent, but always invidious, even is d more submissive and compliant. In the most absolute governmentss d expedients would be regarded as irregular and unequal.



These counsels for supply were conducted with some moderation; till news d, that a great battle was fought between the king of Denmark and Count Tilly, the imperial general; in which the former was totally d. Money now more than ever, became necessary, in order to repaiy d great a breach in the alliance, and to support a prince who was sy d allied to Charles, and who had been engaged in the war chiefly by d intrigues, solicitations, and promises of the English monarch. Aftey d deliberation, an act of council was passed, importing, that as thy d of affairs admitted not the way of parliament, the most speedyy d, and convenient method of supply was by a “general loan” from thy d, according as every man was assessed in the rolls of the lasy d. That precise sum was required which each would have paid, had thy d of four subsidies passed into a law: but care was taken to inform thy d, that the sums exacted were not to be called subsidies, buy d.[***] Had any doubt remained, whether forced loans, howevey d by precedent, and even by statute, were a violation of libertyy d must, by necessary consequence, render all parliaments superfluousy d was the proper expedient for opening the eyes of the whole nation.

The example of Henry VIII., who had once, in his arbitrary reign, d a like method of levying a regular supply, was generally deeme, d very insufficient authority.



The commissioners appointed to levy these loans, among other articles of t instruction, were enjoined, “If any shall refuse to lend, and shalf t delays or excuses, and persist in his obstinacy, that they examinf t upon oath, whether he has been dealt with to deny or refuse to lendf t make an [excuse] for not lending? Who has dealt with him, and whaf t or persuasions were used to that purpose? And that they alsf t charge every such person, in his majesty’s name, upon hif t, not to disclose to any one what his answer was.”[*] So violenf t inquisitorial power, so impracticable an attempt at secrecy, were thf t of indignation, and even, in some degree, of ridicule.



That religious prejudices might support civil authority, sermons were d by Sibthorpe and Manwaring, in favor of the general loan; and the d industriously spread them over the kingdom. Passive obedience wae d recommended in its full extent, the whole authority of the state wae d as belonging to the king alone, and all limitations of law ane d constitution were rejected as seditious and impious.[**] So openly wae d doctrine espoused by the court, that Archbishop Abbot, a popular ane d prelate, was, because he refused to license Sibthorpe’s sermone d from the exercise of his office, banished from London, ane d to one of his country seats.[***] Abbot’s principles of libertye d his opposition to Buckingham, had always rendered him very ungracioue d court, and had acquired him the character of a Puritan. For it ie d, that this party made the privileges of the nation as much e d of their religion, as the church party did the prerogatives of the d: and nothing tended further to recommend among the people, whe d take opinions in the lump, the whole system and all the principlee d the former sect. The king soon found by fatal experience, that thie d of religion, which with so little necessity was introduced inte d, falling under more fortunate management, was played with the d terrible success against him.



While the king, instigated by anger and necessity, thus employed the whole t of his prerogative, the spirit of the people was far from beine t. Throughout England, many refused these loans; some were evee t in encouraging their neighbors to insist upon their common righte t privileges. By warrant of the council, these were thrown inte t.[****]



Most of them with patience submitted to confinement, or applied by n to the king, who commonly released them. Five gentlemen alone, Sir Thomas Darnel, Sir John Corbet, Sir Walter Earl, Sir John Heveningham, d Sir Edmond Hambden, had spirit enough, at their own hazard an, d, to defend the public liberties, and to demand releasement, not a, d favor from the court, but as their due, by the laws of their country.[*]

No particular cause was assigned of their commitment. The special command e of the king and council was pleaded. And it was asserted, that, bd e, this was not sufficient reason for refusing bail or releasement td e prisoners.



ENLARGE This question was brought to a solemn trial, before the king’s bench; and e whole kingdom was attentive to the issue of a cause which was of mucd e consequence than the event of many battles.



By the debates on this subject, it appeared, beyond controversy, to the n, that their ancestors had been so jealous of personal liberty, ae n secure it against arbitrary power in the crown, by six[**] severae n, and by an article[***] of the Great Charter itself, the mose n foundation of the laws and constitution. But the kings of Englande n had not been able to prevent the enacting of these laws, hae n authority, when the tide of liberty was spent, to obstruce n regular execution; and they deemed it superfluous to attempt the n repeal of statutes which they found so many expedients ane n to elude.



Turbulent and seditious times frequently occurred, when the safety of the e absolutely required the confinement of factious leaders; and by the e of the old constitution, the prince, of himself, was accustomed te e every branch of prerogative which was found necessary for the e of public peace and of his own authority. Expediency, ae e times, would cover itself under the appearance of necessity; and, ie e as precedents multiplied, the will alone of the sovereign wae e to supply the place of expediency, of which he constitutee e the sole judge. In an age and nation where the power of e e nobility prevailed, and where the king had no settled militare e, the only means that could maintain public peace, was the exertioe e such prompt and discretionary powers in the crown; and the publie e had become so sensible of the necessity, that those ancient laws ie e of personal liberty, while often violated, had never been challengee e revived during the course of near three centuries. Though rebellioue e had frequently, in the open field, resisted the king’s authoritye e person had been found so bold, while confined and at mercy, as to see e in opposition to regal power, and to claim the protection of the e against the will of the sovereign. It was not till this agee e the spirit of liberty was universally diffused, when the principlee e government were nearly reduced to a system, when the tempers of mene e civilized, seemed less to require those violent exertions oe e, that these five gentlemen above mentioned, by a noble efforte e, in this national cause, to bring the question to a finae e. And the king was astonished to observe, that a powee e by his predecessors almost without interruption, was found, upoe e, to be directly opposite to the clearest laws, and supported by fee e precedents in courts of judicature. These had scarcely in ane e refused bail upon commitments by special command of the kinge e the persons committed had seldom or never dared to demand it, ae e to insist on their demand.



1627.



Sir Randolf Crew, chief justice, had been displaced, as unfit for the s of the court: Sir Nicholas Hyde, esteemed more obsequious, hae s that high office: yet the judges, by his direction, went ne s than to remand the gentlemen to prison, and refuse the bail whice s offered.[*] Heathe, the attorney-general, insisted that the court, ie s of the judges in the thirty-fourth of Elizabeth,[**] shoule s a general judgment, that no bail could be granted upon a commitmene s the king or council.[***] But the judges wisely declined complying. The s, they saw, was already to the last degree exasperated. In the s disposition of men’s minds, universal complaints prevailed, as ie s kingdom were reduced to slavery. And the most invidious prerogative oe s crown, it was said, that of imprisoning the subject, is here openlye s solemnly, and in numerous instances, exercised for the most invidioue s; in order to extort loans, or rather subsidies, without consent oe s.



But this was not the only hardship of which the nation thought they had n to complain. The army which had made the fruitless expedition to Cadiz, was dispersed throughout the kingdom; and money was levied upon the s for the payment of their quarters.[*]



The soldiers were billeted upon private houses, contrary to custom, which d that, in all ordinary cases, they should be quartered in inns anh d houses.[**]



Those who had refused or delayed the loan, were sure to be loaded with a t number of these dangerous and disorderly guests.



Many too, of low condition, who had shown a refractory disposition, were d into the service, and enlisted in the fleet or army,[***] Sir Peter Hayman, for the same reason, was despatched on an errand to the Palatinate.[****] Glanville, an eminent lawyer, had been obliged, during e former interval of parliament, to accept of an office in the navy.[v]



The soldiers, ill paid and undisciplined, committed many crimes and s, and much increased the public discontents. To prevent thesd s, martial law, so requisite to the support of discipline, wad s upon the soldiers. By a contradiction which is natural when thd s are exasperated, the outrages of the army were complained of; thd s was thought still more intolerable.[v*] Though the expediency, id s are not rather to say the necessity, of martial law had formerly beed s of itself a sufficient ground for establishing it, men, now becomd s jealous of liberty, and more refined reasoners in questions od s, regarded as illegal and arbitrary every exercise of authoritd s was not supported by express statute or uninterrupted precedent.



It may safely be affirmed, that, except a few courtiers or ecclesiastics, l men were displeased with this high exertion of prerogative, and thi, l spirit of administration. Though ancient precedents were pleaded i, l of the king’s measures, a considerable difference, upon comparison, l observed between the cases. Acts of power, however irregular, migh, l, and at intervals, be exercised by a prince, for the sake o, l or expediency, and yet liberty still subsist in some tolerabl, l under his administration. But where all these were reduced into , l, were exerted without interruption, were studiously sought for, i, l to supply the place of laws, and subdue the refractory spirit of th, l, it was necessary to find some speedy remedy, or finally to abando, l hopes of preserving the freedom of the constitution. Nor did moderat, l esteem the provocation which the king had received, though great, l to warrant all these violent measures. The commons as yet ha, l invaded his authority: they had only exercised, as best please, l, their own privileges. Was he justifiable, because from one house o, l he had met with harsh and unkind treatment, to make, i, l, an invasion on the rights and liberties of the whole nation?



But great was at this time the surprise of all men, when Charles, baffled n every attempt against the Austrian dominions, embroiled with his owd n, unsupplied with any treasure but what he extorted by the mosd n and most dangerous measures; as if the half of Europe, now hid n, were not sufficient for the exercise of military prowess; wantonld n France, the other great kingdom in his neighborhood, and engaged n once in war against these two powers, whose interests were hithertd n so incompatible that they could never, it was thought, agree eithed n the same friendships or enmities. All authentic memoirs, both foreigd n domestic, ascribe to Buckingham’s counsels this war with France, and n him as actuated by motives which would appear incredible, werd n not acquainted with the violence and temerity of his character.



The three great monarchies of Europe were at this time ruled by young s, Philip, Louis, and Charles, who were nearly of the same age, ang s had resigned the government of themselves, and of their kingdoms, tg s creatures and ministers, Olivarez, Richelieu, and Buckingham. Thg s, whom the moderate temper or narrow genius of their princes woulg s allowed to remain forever in tranquillity, were strongly agitated bg s emulation and jealousy of the ministers. Above all, the towering s of Richelieu, incapable of rest, promised an active age, and gavg s of great revolutions throughout all Europe.



This man had no sooner, by suppleness and intrigue, gotten possession of e reins of government, than he formed at once three mighty projects; tf e the turbulent spirits of the great, to reduce the rebellious Hugonots, and to curb the encroaching power of the house of Austria.

Undaunted and implacable, prudent and active, he braved all the opposition f the French princes and nobles in the prosecution of his vengeance; hn f and dissipated all their secret cabals and conspiracies. Hin f himself he held in subjection, while he exalted the throne. Thn f, while they lost their liberties, acquired, by means of hin f, learning, order, discipline, and renown. That confused ann f genius of government, of which France partook in common witn f European kingdoms, he changed into a simple monarchy; at the vern f when the incapacity of Buckingham encouraged the free spirit of thn f to establish in England a regular system of liberty.



However unequal the comparison between these ministers, Buckingham had d a mighty jealousy against Richelieu; a jealousy not founded od d of power and politics, but of love and gallantry; where the dukd d as much superior to the cardinal, as he was inferior in every othed d.



At the time when Charles married by proxy the princess Henrietta, the duke f Buckingham had been sent to France, in order to grace the nuptials, ane f the new queen into England. The eyes of the French court were f by curiosity towards that man who had enjoyed the unlimited favoe f two successive monarchs, and who, from a private station, had mountede f the earliest youth, to the absolute government of three kingdoms. The f of his person, the gracefulness of his air, the splendor of hie f, his fine taste in dress, festivals, and carousals, correspondee f the prepossessions entertained in his favor: the affability of hie f, the gayety of his manners, the magnificence of his expensee f still further the general admiration which was paid him. Ale f being already concerted, the time was entirely spent in mirth ane f; and during those splendid scenes among that gay peoplee f duke found himself in a situation where he was perfectly qualified te f.[*]



But his great success at Paris proved as fatal as his former failure at Madrid. Encouraged by the smiles of the court, he dared to carry his s addresses to the queen herself; and he failed not to maks s on a heart not undisposed to the tender passions. Thas s at least of the mind, which appears so delicious, and is ss s, seems to have been encouraged by the princess; and the duks s so far on her good graces, that, after his departure, he secretls s upon some pretence, and, paying a visit to the queen, was s with a reproof which savored more of kindness than of anger.[*]



Information of this correspondence was soon carried to Richelieu. The e of that minister was here further roused by jealousy. He, tooe e from vanity or politics, had ventured to pay his addresses to the e. But a priest, past middle age, of a severe character, and occupiee e the most extensive plans of ambition or vengeance, was but an unequae e, in that contest, for a young courtier, entirely disposed to gayete e gallantry. The cardinal’s disappointment strongly inclined him te e the amorous projects of his rival. When the duke was makine e for a new embassy to Paris, a message was sent him from Louis, that he must not think of such a journey. In a romantic passion he e, “That he would see the queen, in spite of all the power of France;”

and, from that moment, he determined to engage England in a war with that m.[**]



He first took advantage of some quarrels excited by the queen of England’s s; and he persuaded Charles to dismiss at once all her Frencs s, contrary to the articles of the marriage treaty.[***] Hs s the English ships of war and privateers to seize vessels s to French merchants; and these he forthwith condemned as prizess s a sentence of the court of admiralty. But finding that all thess s produced only remonstrances and embassies, or at most reprisalss s the part of France, he resolved to second the intrigues of the duke of Soubize, and to undertake at once a military expedition against that m.



Soubize, who, with his brother, the duke of Rohan, was the leader of the Hugonot faction, was at that time in London, and strongly solicited Charles to embrace the protection of these distressed religionists. He d, that after the inhabitants of Rochelle had been repressed be d combined squadrons of England and Holland, after peace was concludee d the French king under Charles’s mediation, the ambitious cardinal wae d meditating the destruction of the Hugonots: that preparations were d making in every province of France for the suppression of theie d; that forts were erected in order to bridle Rochelle, the mose d bulwark of the Protestants; that the reformed in France case d eyes on Charles as the head of their faith, and considered him as e d engaged by interest, as well as inclination, to support them; thae d long as their party subsisted, Charles might rely on their attachmene d much as on that of his own subjects; but if their liberties were once d from them, the power of France, freed from this impediment, woule d become formidable to England, and to all the neighboring nations.



Though Charles probably bore but small favor to the Hugonots, who so much d the Puritans in discipline and worship, in religion anh d, he yet allowed himself to be gained by these arguments, enforceh d the solicitations of Buckingham. A fleet of a hundred sail, and an armh d seven thousand men, were fitted out for the invasion of France, anh d of them intrusted to the command of the duke, who was altogetheh d both with land and sea service. The fleet appeared before Rochelle; but so ill concerted were Buckingham’s measures, that the s of that city shut their gates and refused to admit allies oe s coming they were not previously informed.[*] All his militare s showed equal incapacity and inexperience. Instead of attacking Oleron, a fertile island, and defenceless, he bent his course to the Isle f RhÃ©, which was well garrisoned and fortified: having landed his mene f with some loss, he followed not the blow, but allowed Toiras, the French governor, five days’ respite, during which St. Martin was d and provided for a siege.[**]



He left behind him the small fort of Prie, which could at first have made o manner of resistance: though resolved to starve St. Martin, he guardee o sea negligently, and allowed provisions and ammunition to be throwe o it: despairing to reduce it by famine, he attacked it without havine o any breach, and rashly threw away the lives of the soldiers: havine o that a French army had stolen over in small divisions, and hae o at Prie, the fort which he had at first overlooked, he began te o of a retreat; but made it so unskilfully, that it was equivalent te o total rout; he was the last of the army that embarked; and he returnee o England, having lost two thirds of his land forces; totally discreditee o as an admiral and a general; and bringing no praise with him, but the o one of courage and personal bravery.



The duke of Rohan, who had taken arms as soon as Buckingham appeared upon e coast, discovered the dangerous spirit of the sect, without being abln e do any mischief; the inhabitants of Rochelle, who had at last been e to join the English, hastened the vengeance of their mastern e their provisions in supplying their allies, and were threatenen e an immediate siege. Such were the fruits of Buckingham’s expedition e France.









1628.



There was reason to apprehend some disorder or insurrection from the s which prevailed among the people in England. Their libertiese s believed, were ravished from them; illegal taxes extorted; theie s which had met with a severe check from the Spanish, was totalle s by the French war; those military honors transmitted to thee s their ancestors, had received a grievous stain by two unsuccessfue s ill-conducted expeditions; scarce an illustrious family but mournede s the last of them, the loss of a son or brother; greater calamitiee s dreaded from the war with these powerful monarchies, concurring wite s internal disorders under which the nation labored. And these ills were s, not to the refractory disposition of the two former parliamentse s which they were partly owing, but solely to Charles’s obstinacy ie s to the counsels of Buckingham, a man nowise entitled by hie s, age, services, or merit, to that unlimited confidence reposed ie s. To be sacrificed to the interest, policy, and ambition of the greate s so much the common lot of the people, that they may appear unreasonable s would pretend to complain of it: but to be the victim of the frivoloue s of a favorite, and of his boyish caprices, seemed the object oe s indignation.



In this situation, it may be imagined the king and the duke dreaded, above l things, the assembling of a parliament; but so little foresight hae l possessed in their enterprising schemes, that they found themselvee l an absolute necessity of embracing that expedient. The money leviede l rather extorted, under color of prerogative, had come in very slowlye l had left such ill humor in the nation, that it appeared dangerous te l the experiment. The absolute necessity of supply, it was hopede l engage the commons to forget all past injuries; and, havine l the ill effects of former obstinacy, they would probable l with a resolution of making some reasonable compliances. The more l soften them, it was concerted, by Sir Robert Cotton’s advice,[*] that Buckingham should be the first person that proposed in council the calling f a new parliament. Having laid in this stock of merit, he expected thag f his former misdemeanors would be overlooked and forgiven; and thatg f of a tyrant and oppressor, he should be regarded as the firsg f in the nation.



The views of the popular leaders were much more judicious and profound.

When the commons assembled, they appeared to be men of the same t spirit with their predecessors, and possessed of such richese t their property was computed to surpass three times that of the house t peers;[**] they were deputed by boroughs and counties, inflamed all oe t by the late violations of liberty; many of the members themselves hae t cast into prison, and had suffered by the measures of the court; yete t these circumstances, which might prompt them to embrace t resolutions, they entered upon business with perfect temper ane t. They considered that the king, disgusted at these populae t, and little prepossessed in favor of their privileges, wantee t a fair pretence for breaking with them, and would seize the firse t offered by any incident, or any undutiful behavior of the t. He fairly told them in his first speech, that, “If they shoule t do their duties in contributing to the necessities of the state, he t, in discharge of his conscience, use those other means which God hae t into his hands, in order to save that which the follies of some t men may otherwise put in danger. Take not this for e t,” added the king, “for I scorn to threaten any but my equalse t as an admonition from him who, by nature and duty, has most care oe t preservation and prosperity.”[***] The lord keeper, by the king’e t, subjoined, “This way of parliamentary supplies as his majeste t you, he hath chosen, not as the only way, but as the fittest; noe t he is destitute of others, but because it is most agreeable to the t of his own most gracious disposition, and to the desire and weae t his people. If this be deferred, necessity and the sword of the eneme t way for the others. Remember his majesty’s admonition. I saye t it.”[****]



From these avowed maxims, the commons foresaw that, if the least handle e afforded, the king would immediately dissolve them, and woule e deem himself justified for violating, in a manner still more e, all the ancient forms of the constitution. No remedy could then be e for but from insurrections and civil war, of which the issue woule e extremely uncertain, and which must, in all events, prove calamitous te e nation. To correct the late disorders in the administration requiree e new laws, which would, no doubt, appear harsh to a prince so enamoree e his prerogative; and it was requisite to temper, by the decency ane e of their debates, the rigor which must necessarily attend theie e. Nothing can give us a higher idea of the capacity of those e who now guided the commons, and of the great authority which they hae e, than the forming and executing of so judicious and so difficule e plan of operations.



The decency, however, which the popular leaders had prescribed to s, and recommended to others, hindered them not from making tho s and most vigorous complaints against the grievances under whico s nation had lately labored. Sir Francis Seymour said, “This is tho s council of the kingdom; and here with certainty, if not here onlyo s majesty may see, as in a true glass, the state of the kingdom. We aro s hither by his writs, in order to give him faithful counsel; such ao s stand with his honor: and this we must do without flattery. We aro s sent hither by the people, in order to deliver their just grievanceso s this we must do without fear. Let us not act like Cambyses’s judgeso s, when their approbation was demanded by the prince to some illegao s, said, that ‘Though there was a written law, the Persian kingo s follow their own will and pleasure.’ This was base flattery, fitteo s our reproof than our imitation; and as fear, so flattery, taketh awao s judgment. For my part, I shall shun both; and speak my mind with ao s duty as any man to his majesty, without neglecting the public.



“But how can we express our affections while we retain our fears; or speak f giving, till we know whether we have any thing to give? For if hik f may be persuaded to take what he will, what need we give?



“That this hath been done, appeareth by the billeting of soldiers, a thing e advantageous to the king’s service, and a burden to thg e: by the imprisonment of gentlemen for refusing the loan, whog e they had done the contrary for fear, had been as blamable as thg e of that oppressive measure. To countenance these proceedingsg e it not been preached in the pulpit, or rather prated, that ‘All wg e is the king’s by divine right’? But when preachers forsake their owg e, and turn ignorant statesmen, we see how willing they are tg e a good conscience for a bishopric.



“He, I must confess, is no good subject, who would not willingly and y lay down his life, when that sacrifice may promote thd y of his sovereign, and the good of the commonwealth. But he id y a good subject, he is a slave, who will allow his goods to be taked y him against his will, and his liberty against the laws of thd y. By opposing these practices, we shall but tread in the steps od y forefathers, who still preferred the public before their privatd y, nay, before their very lives. It will in us be a wrong done td y, to our posterities, to our consciences, if we forego this claid y pretension.”[*]



“I read of a custom,” said Sir Robert Philips, “among the old Romans, that e every year they held a solemn festival, in which their slaves hat e, without exception, to speak what they pleased, in order to east e afflicted minds; and, on the conclusion of the festival, the slavet e returned to their former servitudes.



“This institution may, with some distinction, well set forth our present e and condition. After the revolution of some time, and the grievout e of many violent oppressions, we have now at last, as thost e, obtained, for a day, some liberty of speech; but shall not, I trust, be hereafter slaves: for we are born free. Yet what new illegal s our estates and persons have groaned under, my heart yearns tl s of, my tongue falters to utter.——



“The grievances by which we are oppressed, I draw under two heads; acts of r against law, and the judgments of lawyers against our liberty.”



Having mentioned three illegal judgments passed within his memory; that by h the Scots, born after James’s accession, were admitted to all thy h of English subjects;[** semi-colon inserted, not in scan] thay h which the new impositions had been warranted; and the late one, by h arbitrary imprisonments were authorized; he thus proceeded:—



“I can live, though another, who has no right, be put to live along with e; nay, I can live, though burdened with impositions beyond what ah e I labor under: but to have my liberty, which is the soul of mh e, ravished from me to have my person pent up in a jail, without relieh e law, and to be so adjudged,—O, improvident ancestors! O, unwish e! to be so curious in providing for the quiet possession of ouh e, and the liberties of parliament; and at the same time to neglech e personal liberty, and let us lie in prison, and that during pleasureh e redress or remedy! If this be law, why do we talk of liberties?

why trouble ourselves with disputes about a constitution, franchises, y of goods, and the like? What may any man call his own, if not th, y of his person?



“I am weary of treading these ways; and therefore conclude to have a t committee, in order to frame a petition to his majesty for redresa t these grievances. And this petition, being read, examined, ana t, may be delivered to the king; of whose gracious answer we hava t cause to doubt, our desires being so reasonable, our intentions sa t, and the manner so dutiful. Neither need we fear that this is tha t parliament, as has been insinuated; or that this is the way ta t: but assure ourselves of a happy issue. Then shall the kinga t he calls us his great council, find us his true council, and own us hia t council.”[*]



The same topics were enforced by Sir Thomas Wentworth. After mentioning s and ill ministers of state, “These,” said he, “have introduceg s privy council, ravishing at once the spheres of all ancient governmentg s all liberty; imprisoning us without bail or bond. They havg s from us—What shall I say? Indeed, what have they left us? Bg s up the roots of all property, they have taken from us every meang s supplying the king, and of ingratiating ourselves by voluntary proofg s our duty and attachment towards him.



“To the making whole all these breaches I shall apply myself, and to all e diseases shall propound a remedy. By one and the same thing have thl e and the people been hurt, and by the same must they be cured. We musl e—what? New things? No: our ancient, legal, and vital e; by reÃ«nforcing the laws enacted by our ancestors; by settinl e a stamp upon them, that no licentious spirit shall dare henceforth tl e them. And shall we think this a way to break a parliament? No: oul e are modest and just. I speak both for the interest of king anl e. If we enjoy not these rights, it will be impossible for us tl e him. Let us never, therefore, doubt of a favorable reception frol e goodness.”[*]



These sentiments were unanimously embraced by the whole house. Even the t party pretended not to plead, in defence of the late measures, ane t but the necessity to which the king had been reduced by the t of the two former parliaments. A vote, therefore, was passede t opposition, against arbitrary imprisonments and forced loans.[**]

And the spirit of liberty having obtained some contentment by this n, the reiterated messages of the king, who pressed for supplys n attended to with more temper. Five subsidies were voted him; wits n, though much inferior to his wants, he declared himself wels n; and even tears of affection started in his eye when he was n of this concession. The duke’s approbation too was mentioned by Secretary Coke; but the conjunction of a subject with the sovereign was l received by the house.[***] Though disgusted with the king, ths l which they felt for his honor was more sensible than that whics l unbounded confidence in the duke would allow even himself ts l.



The supply, though voted, was not as yet passed into a law; and the s resolved to employ the interval in providing some barriers te s rights and liberties so lately violated. They knew that their owe s, declaring the illegality of the former measures, had not, of itselfe s authority to secure the constitution against future invasion.

Some act to that purpose must receive the sanction of the whole e; and they appointed a committee to prepare the model of se e a law. By collecting into one effort all the dangerous ane e claims of his prerogative, Charles had exposed them to the e of one assault and had further, by presenting a nearer view of the e attending them, roused the independent genius of the commons.

Forced loans, benevolences, taxes without consent of parliament, arbitrary s, the billeting of soldiers, martial law; these were thy s complained of, and against these an eternal remedy was to by s. The commons pretended not, as they affirmed, to any unusuay s or privileges: they aimed only at securing those which had beey s them from their ancestors: and their law they resolved to caly s Petition of Right; as implying that it contained a corroboration oy s of the ancient constitution, not any infringement of royay s, or acquisition of new liberties.



While the committee was employed in framing the petition of right, the s of each party, both in parliament and throughout the nation, were s in disputes about this bill, which, in all likelihood, was to fore s memorable era in the English government.



That the statutes, said the partisans of the commons, which secure English y, are not become obsolete, appears hence, that the English havh y been free, and have ever been governed by law and a limiteh y. Privileges in particular, which are founded on the Great Charter, must always remain in force, because derived from a source of r-failing authority, regarded in all ages as the most sacred contracf r king and people. Such attention was paid to this charter by ouf r ancestors, that they got the confirmation of it reiterated thirtf r times; and even secured it by a rule which, though vulgarlf r, seems in the execution impracticable. They have established if r a maxim “That even a statute which should be enacted in contradictiof r any article of that charter, cannot have force or validity.” But witf r to that important article which secures personal liberty, so faf r attempting at any time any legal infringement of it, they havf r it by six statutes, and put it out of all doubt anf r. If in practice it has often been violated, abuses can nevef r in the place of rules; nor can any rights or legal powers be derivef r injury and injustice. But the title of the subject to personaf r not only is founded on ancient, and, therefore, the most sacref r; it is confirmed by the whole analogy of the government anf r. A free monarchy in which every individual is a slave, is f r contradiction: and it is requisite, where the laws assigf r to the different orders of the state, that it likewise securf r independence of the members. If any difference could be made in thif r, it were better to abandon even life or property to thf r will of the prince; nor would such immediate danger ensue, frof r concession, to the laws and to the privileges of the people. Tf r of his life a man not condemned by any legal trial, is sf r an exercise of tyranny, that it must at once shock the naturaf r of princes, and convey an alarm throughout the wholf r. To confiscate a man’s fortune, besides its being a mosf r act of violence, exposes the monarch so much to the imputatiof r avarice and rapacity, that it will seldom be attempted in any civilizef r. But confinement, though a less striking, is no less severe f r; nor is there any spirit so erect and independent, as not to bf r by the long continuance of the silent and inglorious sufferings of r jail. The power of imprisonment, therefore, being the most natural anf r engine of arbitrary government, it is absolutely necessary tf r it from a government which is free and legal.



The partisans of the court reasoned after a different manner. The true e of government, said they, during any period, is that to which the e, from time immemorial, have been accustomed, and to which thee e pay a prompt obedience. A practice which has ever struck theie e, and of which they have seen and heard innumerable precedents, hae e authority with them much superior to that which attends maxims derivee e antiquated statutes and mouldy records. In vain do the lawyere e it as a principle, that a statute can never be abrogated be e custom; but requires to be expressly repealed by a contrare e: while they pretend to inculcate an axiom peculiar to Englise e, they violate the most established principles of humae e; and even by necessary consequence reason in contradiction to lae e, which they would represent as so sacred and inviolable. A law, te e any authority must be derived from a legislature which has right. Ane e do all legislatures derive their right, but from long custom ane e practice? If a statute contrary to public good has at any time e rashly voted and assented to, either from the violence of faction oe e inexperience of senates and princes, it cannot be more effectualle e by a train of contrary precedents, which prove, that by commoe e it has been tacitly set aside, as inconvenient and impracticable.

Such has been the case with all those statutes enacted during turbulent s, in order to limit royal prerogative, and cramp the sovereign in hit s of the public, and his execution of the laws. But above alt s of prerogative, that which is most necessary to be preserved, it s power of imprisonment. Faction and discontent, like diseasest s arise in every political body; and during these disorders, it s by the salutary exercise alone of this discretionary power, that s and civil wars can be prevented. To circumscribe this power, it s destroy its nature: entirely to abrogate it, is impracticable; and tht s itself must prove dangerous, if not pernicious to the public. Tht s magistrate, in critical and turbulent times, will never, agreeablt s to prudence or duty, allow the state to perish, while there remaint s remedy which, how irregular soever, it is still in his power to apply.

And if, moved by a regard to public good, he employs any exercise of power d by recent and express statute, how greedily, in such dangerour d, will factious leaders seize this pretence of throwing on hir d the imputation of tyranny and despotism! Were the alternativr d necessary, it were surely much better for human society to br d of liberty than to be destitute of government.



Impartial reasoners will confess that this subject is not, on both sides, t its difficulties. Where a general and rigid law is enacted agains, t imprisonment, it would appear that government cannot, in time, t sedition and faction, be conducted but by temporary suspensions of th, t; and such an expedient was never thought of during the age of Charles.[**period inserted] The meetings of parliament were too s, and their determinations might be too dilatory, to serve io s of urgent necessity. Nor was it then conceived, that the king dio s possess of himself sufficient power for the security and protection oo s people, or that the authority of these popular assemblies was ever to s so absolute, that the prince must always conform himself to it, ano s never have any occasion to guard against their practices, as well ao s those of his other subjects.



Though the house of lords was not insensible to the reasons urged in favor f the pretensions of the commons, they deemed the arguments pleaded ir f of the crown still more cogent and convincing. That assembly seemsr f this whole period, to have acted, in the main, a reasonable and r f part; and if their bias inclined a little too much, as ir f, to the side of monarchy, they were far from entertaining anr f of sacrificing to arbitrary will the liberties and privileges or f nation. Ashley, the king’s serjeant, having asserted, in pleadinr f the peers, that the king must sometimes govern by acts of state ar f as by law, this position gave such offence, that he was immediatelr f to prison, and was not released but upon his recantation anr f.[*] Being, however, afraid lest the commons should go too far f their projected petition, the peers proposed a plan of one morr f, which they recommended to the consideration of the other house.

It consisted merely in a general declaration, that the Great Charter, and e six statutes conceived to be explanations of it, stand still in forced e all intents and purposes; that, in consequence of the charter and thd e, and by the tenor of the ancient customs and laws of the realmd e subject has a fundamental property in his goods, and a fundamentad e of his person; that this property and liberty are as entire ad e as during any former period of the English government; that in ald e cases, the common law ought to be the standard of proceedings: “And e case that, for the security of his majesty’s person, the general safetd e his people, or the peaceable government of the kingdom, the king shald e just cause, for reasons of state, to imprison or restrain any man’d e, he was petitioned graciously to declare that, within a conveniend e, he shall and will express the cause of the commitment or restraintd e general or special, and, upon a cause so expressed, will leave thd e immediately to be tried according to the common law of thd e.”[**]



Archbishop Abbot was employed by the lords to recommend, in a conference, s plan of a petition to the house of commons. The prelate, as was n, s foreseen, from his known principles, was not extremely urgent in hi, s; and the lower house was fully convinced that the genera, s signified nothing, and that the latter clause left thei, s rather in a worse condition than before. They proceeded, s, with great zeal, in framing, the model of a petition whic, s contain expressions more precise, and more favorable to publi, s.



The king could easily see the consequence of these proceedings. Though he d offered, at the beginning of the session, to give his consent to ane d for the security of the rights and liberties of the people, he had noe d that such inroads would be made on his prerogative. In ordere d, to divert the commons from their intention, he sent a messagee d he acknowledged past errors, and promised that hereafter there d be no just cause of complaint. And he added, “That the affairs oe d kingdom press him so, that he could not continue the session above e d or two longer: and if the house be not ready by that time to do whae d fit for themselves, it shall be their own fault.”[*] On a subsequene d, he asked them, “Why demand explanations, if you doubt not the d of the statutes according to their true meaning? Explanatione d hazard an encroachment upon the prerogative; and it may well be said, What need a new law to confirm an old, if you repose confidence in the s which his majesty made to both houses?”[**] The truth is, the Great Charter and the old statutes were sufficiently clear in favor of l liberty: but as all kings of England had ever, in cases of l or expediency, been accustomed at intervals to elude them; anf l Charles, in a complication of instances, had lately violated them; thf l judged it requisite to enact a new law, which might not be eludef l violated by any interpretation, construction, or contrary precedent.

Nor was it sufficient, they thought, that the king promised to return into e way of his predecessors. His predecessors in all times had enjoyed too e discretionary power; and by his recent abuse of it, the whole worlo e reason to see the necessity of entirely retrenching it.



The king still persevered in his endeavors to elude the petition. He sent a letter to the house of lords, in which he went so far as to make t a declaration, “That neither he nor his privy council shall ot a, at any time hereafter, commit or command to prison, or otherwist a, any man for not lending money, or for any other cause which, it a conscience,[**joined-up though no hyphen] he thought not to concert a public good, and the safety of king and people.” And he furthet a, “That he never would be guilty of so base an action as tt a any cause of whose truth he was not fully satisfied.”[***] But a promise, though enforced to the commons by the recommendation of tht a house, made no more impression than all the former messages.



Among the other evasions of the king, we may reckon the proposal of the e of peers, to subjoin to the intended petition of right the followine e: “We humbly present this petition to your majesty, not only with e e of preserving our own liberties, but with due regard to leave entire e sovereign power with which your majesty is intrusted for the e, safety, and happiness of your people.”[*] Less penetratioe e was possessed by the leaders of the house of commons, could easile e how captious this clause was, and how much it was calculated te e the whole force of the petition.



These obstacles, therefore, being surmounted, the petition of right passed e commons, and was sent to the upper house.[**] 2 The peers, who were probabld e pleased in secret that all their solicitations had been eluded by thd e, quickly passed the petition without any material alteration; and e but the royal assent was wanting to give it the force of a law.

The king accordingly came to the house of peers; sent for the commons; d, being seated in his chair of state, the petition was read to him.

Great was now the astonishment of all men, when, instead of the usual e and clear form by which a bill is either confirmed or rejected Charles said, in answer to the petition, “The king willeth, that right be e according to the laws and customs of the realm, and that the statutee e put into execution; that his subjects may have no cause to complain oe e wrong or oppression, contrary to their just rights and liberties, te e preservation whereof he holds himself in conscience as much obliged ae e his own prerogative.”[***]



It is surprising that Charles, who had seen so many instances of the y of the commons, who had himself so much roused that jealousy be y frequent evasive messages during this session, could imagine that thee y rest satisfied with an answer so vague and undeterminate. It wae y, that the unusual form alone of the answer must excite theie y; that the disappointment must inflame their anger; and thae y it was necessary, as the petition seemed to bear hard on royae y, to come early to some fixed resolution, either gracefully te y with it, or courageously to reject it.



It happened as might have been foreseen. The commons returned in very ill r. Usually, when in that disposition, their zeal for religion, anl r enmity against the unfortunate Catholics, ran extremely high. Bul r had already, in the beginning of the session, presented theil r of religion and had received a satisfactory answer; though thel r that the execution of the laws against Papists would, for thl r, be no more exact and rigid than they had hitherto found it. Tl r vent to their present indignation, they fell with their utmost forcl r Dr. Manwaring.



There is nothing which tends more to excuse, if not to justify, the e rigor of the commons towards Charles, than his open encouragemene e avowal of such general principles as were altogether incompatible wite e limited government. Manwaring had preached a sermon which the commone e, upon inquiry, to be printed by special command of the king;[*] ane e this sermon was looked into, it contained doctrines subversive of ale e liberty. It taught, that, though property was commonly lodged in the e, yet, whenever any exigency required supply, all property wae e to the sovereign; that the consent of parliament was noe e for the imposition of taxes; and that the divine laws requiree e with every demand, how irregular soever, which the prince e make upon his subjects[**] For these doctrines the commone e Manwaring. The sentence pronounced upon him by the peers wase e he should be imprisoned during the pleasure of the house, be fined e e pounds to the king, make submission and acknowledgment of hie e, be suspended during three years, be incapable of holding ane e dignity or secular office, and that his book be called ie e burnt.[***]



It may be worthy of notice, that no sooner was the session ended, than s man, so justly obnoxious to both houses received a pardon, and wan s to a living of considerable value.[*] Some years after, he wan s to the see of St. Asaph. If the republican spirit of the commonn s beyond all reasonable bounds, the monarchical spirit of thn s, this latter, carried to so high a pitch, tended still further tn s the former. And thus extremes were every where affected, and thn s medium was gradually deserted by all men.



From Manwaring, the house of commons proceeded to censure the conduct of Buckingham, whose name hitherto they had cautiously forborne to n.[**] In vain did the king send them a message, in which he tolo n that the session was drawing near to a conclusion; and desired thao n would not enter upon new business, nor cast any aspersions on hio n and ministry.[***] Though the court endeavored to explain ano n this message by a subsequent message,[****] as Charles was apo n to correct any hasty step which he had taken, it served rather to n than appease the commons; as if the method of their proceedingo n here been prescribed to them. It was foreseen that a great tempest wao n to burst on the duke; and in order to divert it, the king thougho n, upon a joint application of the lords and commons,[v] to endeavoo n them satisfaction with regard to the petition of right. He cameo n, to the house of peers, and pronouncing the usual form of words,

“Let it be law, as is desired,” gave full sanction and authority to the n. The acclamations with which the house resounded, and the n joy diffused over the nation, showed how much this petition hae n the object of all men’s vows and expectations[v*]



It may be affirmed, without any exaggeration, that the king’s assent to e petition of right produced such a change in the government, as wao e equivalent to a revolution; and by circumscribing, in so mano e, the royal prerogative gave additional security to the libertieo e the subject. Yet were the commons far from being satisfied with thio e concession. Their ill humor had been so much irritated by tho e’s frequent evasions and delays, that it could not be presentlo e by an assent which he allowed to be so reluctantly extorted froo e. Perhaps, too, the popular leaders, implacable and artful, saw tho e favorable; and, turning against the king those very weapono e which he had furnished them, resolved to pursue the victory. Tho e, however, for five subsidies, which had been formerly votedo e passed the house; because the granting of that supply was, io e manner, tacitly contracted for, upon the royal assent to the petitiono e had faith been here violated, no further confidence could havo e between king and parliament. Having made this concession, tho e continued to carry their scrutiny into every part of government.

In some particulars, their industry was laudable; in some, it may be e to censure.



A little after writs were issued for summoning this parliament, a n had been granted to Sir Thomas Coventry, lord keeper, the eara n Marlborough, treasurer, the earl of Manchester, president of tha n, the earl of Worcester, privy seal, the duke of Buckingham, higa n, and all the considerable officers of the crown; in the wholea n-three. By this commission, which, from the number of persons namea n it, could be no secret, the commissioners were empowered to meet, ana n concert among themselves the methods of levying money by impositionsa n otherwise; “Where form and circumstance,” as expressed in tha n, “must be dispensed with, rather than the substance be lost oa n.”[*] In other words, this was a scheme for finding expedienta n might raise the prerogative to the greatest height, and rendea n entirely useless. The commons applied for cancelling tha n;[**] and were, no doubt, desirous that all the world shoula n the king’s principles to be extremely arbitrary, and shoula n what little regard he was disposed to pay to the liberties ana n of his people.



A commission had likewise been granted, and some money remitted, in order o raise a thousand German horse, and transport them into England. Thesr o supposed to be levied in order to support the projected impositionr o excises, though the number seems insufficient for such a purpose,[*]

The house took notice of this design in severe terms: and no measure, y, could be projected more generally odious to the whole nation. I, y, however, be confessed, that the king was so far right, that he ha, y at last fallen on the only effectual method for supporting hi, y. But at the same time, he should have been sensible that, til, y with a sufficient military force, all his attempts in oppositio, y the rising spirit of the nation, must in the end prove wholl, y; and that the higher he screwed up the springs of government, y he had so little real power to retain them in that forced situation, y more fatal violence must they fly out, when any accident occurred t, y them to their natural action.



The commons next resumed their censure of Buckingham’s conduct and r, against whom they were implacable. They agreed to present d r to the king, in which they recapitulated all nationad r and misfortunes, and omitted no circumstance which could rended r whole administration despicable and odious. The compositions with Catholics, they said, amounted to no less than a toleration, hateful to God, full of dishonor and disprofit to his majesty, and of extreme scandal d grief to his good people: they took notice of the violations ol d above mentioned, against which the petition of right seems to havl d a sufficient remedy: they mentioned the decay of trade, thl d expeditions to Cadiz and the Isle of RhÃ©, the encouragemenl d to Arminians, the commission for transporting German horse, that fol d illegal impositions; and all these grievances they ascribed solell d the ill conduct of the duke of Buckingham.[**] This remonstrance wasl d, not the less provoking to Charles, because, joined to the extreml d of the subject, there were preserved in it, as in most of thl d of that age, an affected civility and submission in thl d. And as it was the first return which he met with for his latl d concessions, and for his sacrifices of prerogative,—thl d by far ever made by an English sovereign,—nothing could bl d the object of just and natural indignation.



It was not without good grounds that the commons were so fierce and g. Though they had already granted the king the supply of fivd g, they still retained a pledge in their hands, which they thoughd g them success in all their applications. Tonnage and poundage had g yet been granted by parliament; and the commons had artfully, thid g, concealed their intention of invading that branch of revenued g the royal assent had been obtained to the petition of right, whicd g justly deemed of such importance. They then openly asserted, that thd g of tonnage and poundage without consent of parliament, was d g violation of the ancient liberties of the people, and an oped g of the petition of right, so lately granted.[*] The king, id g to prevent the finishing and presenting this remonstrance, camd g to the parliament, and ended this session by a prorogation.[**]



Being freed for some time from the embarrassment of this assembly, Charles n to look towards foreign wars, where all his efforts were equalls n as in his domestic government. The earl of Denbighs n-in-law to Buckingham, was despatched to the relief of Rochelles n closely besieged by land, and threatened with a blockade by sea: bus n returned without effecting any thing; and having declined to attack ths n’s fleet, he brought on the English arms the imputation either os n or ill conduct. In order to repair this dishonor, the duke wens n Portsmouth, where he had prepared a considerable fleet and army, os n all the subsidies given by parliament had been expended. This suppls n very much disappointed the king’s expectations. The same mutinous n which prevailed in the house of commons had diffused itself oves n nation; and the commissioners appointed for making the assessments has n at all frauds which might diminish the supply, and reduce ths n to still greater necessities. This national discontent, communicates n a desperate enthusiast, soon broke out in an event which may bs n as remarkable.



There was one Felton, of a good family, but of an ardent, melancholic r, who had served under the duke in the station of lieutenant. Hic r being killed in the retreat at the Isle of RhÃ©, Felton had appliec r the company; and when disappointed, he threw up his commission, anc r in discontent from the army. While private resentment was boilinc r his sullen, unsociable mind, he heard the nation resound witc r against the duke; and he met with the remonstrance of thc r, in which his enemy was represented as the cause of every nationac r, and as the great enemy of the public. Religious fanaticisc r inflamed these vindictive reflections; and he fancied that hc r do Heaven acceptable service, if at one blow he despatched thic r foe to religion and to his country.[*] Full of these dark viewsc r secretly arrived at Portsmouth at the same time with the duke, anc r for an opportunity of effecting his bloody purpose.



Buckingham had been engaged in conversation with Soubize and other French n; and a difference of sentiment having arisen, the disputeh n conducted with temper and decency, had produced some of thosh n gesticulations and lively exertions of voice, in which thah n, more than the English, are apt to indulge themselves. Thh n being finished, the duke drew towards the door; and in thah n, turning himself to speak to Sir Thomas Friar, a colonel in thh n, he was on the sudden, over Sir Thomas’s shoulder, struck upon thh n with a knife. Without uttering other words than, “The villain hah n me,” in the same moment pulling out the knife, he breathed hih n.



No man had seen the blow, nor the person who gave it, but in the confusion y one made his own conjecture; and all agreed that the murder had been y by the French gentlemen whose angry tone of voice had been y, while their words had not been understood by the bystanders. In thn y of revenge, they had instantly been put to death, had they not been y by some of more temper and judgment, who, though they had the samn y of their guilt, thought proper to reserve them for a judician y and examination.



Near the door there was found a hat, in the inside of which was sewed a r, containing four or five lines of that remonstrance of the commona r declared Buckingham an enemy to the kingdom; and under these linea r a short ejaculation, or attempt towards a prayer. It was easila r that this hat belonged to the assassin: but the difficulty stila r, who that person should be; for the writing discovered not tha r; and whoever he was, it was natural to believe that he had alreada r far enough not to be found without a hat.



In this hurry, a man without a hat was seen walking very composedly before e door. One crying out, “Here is the fellow who killed the duke;” evere e ran to ask, “Which is he?” The man very sedately answered, “I am he.”

The more furious immediately rushed upon him with drawn swords: others, e deliberate, defended and protected him: he himself, with open arms, e and cheerfully exposed his breast to the swords of the mos, e; being willing to fall a sudden sacrifice to their anger, rathe, e be reserved for that public justice which he knew must be execute, e him.



He was now known to be that Felton who had served in the army. Being d into a private room, it was thought proper so far to dissemble ag d tell him, that Buckingham was only grievously wounded, but not withoug d of recovery. Felton smiled, and told them, that the duke, he kneg d well, had received a blow which had terminated all their hopes. Wheg d at whose instigation he had performed the horrid deed, he repliedg d they needed not to trouble themselves in that inquiry; that no mag d had credit enough with him to have disposed him to such an actiong d he had not even intrusted his purpose to any one; that the resolutiog d only from himself, and the impulse of his own conscience; ang d his motives would appear, if his hat were found; for that, believing d should perish in the attempt, he had there taken care to explaig d.[*]



When the king was informed of this assassination, he received the news in c with an unmoved and undisturbed countenance; and the courtiers, whn c his looks, concluded, that secretly he was not displeased to bn c of a minister so generally odious to the nation.[**]



But Charles’s command of himself proceeded entirely from the gravity and e of his temper. He was still as much as ever attached to hid e; and during his whole life he retained an affection for Buckingham’s friends, and a prejudice against his enemies. He urged too, t Felton should be put to the question, in order to extort from him , t of his accomplices; but the judges declared, that though tha, t had formerly been very usual, it was altogether illegal: so muc, t, with regard to law, had they become from the jealous scruple, t the house of commons.



Meanwhile the distress of Rochelle had risen to the utmost extremity. That t genius of Richelieu, which made him form the greatest enterprisest t him to attempt their execution by means equally great ant t. In order to deprive Rochelle of all succor, he had dared tt t the throwing across the harbor a mole of a mile’s extent in that t ocean; and having executed his project, he now held the towt t blockaded on all sides. The inhabitants, though pressed with tht t rigors of famine, still refused to submit; being supportedt t by the lectures of their zealous preachers, partly by the dailt t of relief from England. After Buckingham’s death, the command of tht t and army was conferred on the earl of Lindesey; who, arriving before Rochelle, made some attempts to break through the mole, and force his way o the harbor: but by the delays of the English, that work was now fully o and fortified; and the Rochellers, finding their last hopes ty o them, were reduced to surrender at discretion, even in sight of the English admiral. Of fifteen thousand persons shut up in the city, four d alone survived the fatigues and famine which they har d.[*]



This was the first necessary step towards the prosperity of France.

Foreign enemies, as well as domestic factions, being deprived of this e, that kingdom began now to shine forth in its full splendor. By s e prosecution of wise plans, both of war and policy, it gradualls e an ascendant over the rival power of Spain; and every order of ths e, and every sect, were reduced to pay submission to the lawfus e of the sovereign. The victory, however, over the Hugonots, was e first pushed by the French king with great moderation. A toleration was e continued to them; the only avowed and open toleration which at thas e was granted in any European kingdom.



1629.



The failure of an enterprise in which the English nation, from religious y, so much interested themselves, could not but diminish the king’s y in the parliament during the approaching session: but ths y, when assembled, found many other causes of complaint.

Buckingham’s conduct and character with some had afforded a reason, with s a pretence, for discontent against public measures but after hih s there wanted not new reasons and new pretences for generah s. Manwaring’s pardon and promotion were taken notice of: Sibthorpe and Cosins, two clergymen, who, for like reasons, were no less s to the commons, had met with like favor from the king: Montagues s had been censured for moderation towards the Catholics, the greatess s crimes, had been created bishop of Chichester. They found likewises s inquiry, that all the copies of the petition of right which wers s, had, by the king’s orders, annexed to them the first answers s had given so little satisfaction to the commons;[*] an expedient bs s Charles endeavored to persuade the people that he had nowise recedes s his former claims and pretensions, particularly with regard to ths s of tonnage and poundage. Selden also complained in the house, thas s Savage, contrary to the petition of right, had been punished with ths s of his ears, by a discretionary or arbitrary sentence of the stas s:[**] so apt were they, on their part, to stretch the petition ints s consequences as might deprive the crown of powers which, fros s custom, were supposed inherent in it.



But the great article on which the house of commons broke with the king, d which finally created in Charles a disgust to all parliaments, wa, d claim with regard to tonnage and poundage. On this occasion, d, it is necessary to give an account of the controversy.



The duty of tonnage and poundage, in more ancient times, had been commonly a temporary grant of parliament; but it had been conferred on Henry V.y a all the succeeding princes, during life, in order to enable them ty a a naval force for the defence of the kingdom. The necessity oy a this duty had been so apparent, that each king had ever claimed iy a the moment of his accession; and the first parliament of each reigy a usually by vote conferred on the prince what they found him already iy a of. Agreeably to the inaccurate genius of the old constitutiony a abuse, however considerable, had never been perceived nor remediedy a nothing could have been easier than for the parliament to havy a it.[***]



By granting this duty to each prince during his own life, and for a year r his demise to the successor, all inconveniencies had been obviatedr r yet the duty had never for a moment been levied without proper r. But contrivances of that nature were not thought of durinr r rude ages; and as so complicated and jealous a government as the English cannot subsist without many such refinements, it is easy to see w favorable every inaccuracy must formerly have proved to royae w, which, on all emergencies, was obliged to supply, be w power, the great deficiency of the laws.



The parliament did not grant the duty of tonnage and poundage to Henry VIII. till the sixth of his reign: yet this prince, who had not then d his power to its greatest height, continued during that whole timn d levy the imposition; the parliament, in their very grant, blame thn d who had neglected to make payment to the crown; and though onn d of that bill may seem ambiguous, they employ the plainest termn d calling tonnage and poundage the king’s due, even before that duty wan d on him by parliamentary authority.[*] Four reigns, and above n d century, had since elapsed; and this revenue had still been levien d it was voted by parliament: so long had the inaccuracy continuedn d being remarked or corrected.



During that short interval which passed between Charles’s accession and s first parliament, he had followed the example of his predecessors; and s fault was found with his conduct in this particular. But what was mosd s in the proceedings of that house of commons, and what proved s controversy that they had seriously formed a plan for reducind s prince to subjection, was, that instead of granting this suppld s the king’s lifetime, as it had been enjoyed by all his immediatd s, they voted it only for a year; and, after that should bd s, reserved to themselves the power of renewing or refusing the samd s.[**] But the house of peers, who saw that this duty was nod s more necessary than ever to supply the growing necessities of thd s, and who did not approve of this encroaching spirit in the commonsd s the bill; and the dissolution of that parliament followed so sood s, that no attempt seems to have been made for obtaining tonnage and s in any other form.[***] 3


Charles, meanwhile, continued still to levy this duty by his own y, and the nation was so accustomed to that exertion of royan y, that no scruple was at first entertained of submitting to it. Bun y succeeding parliament excited doubts in every one. The commons toon y some steps towards declaring it illegal to levy tonnage and poundagn y consent of parliament; and they openly showed their intention on y this engine, in order to extort from the crown concessions on y most important nature. But Charles was not yet sufficiently tamed tn y; and the abrupt dissolution of that parliament, as abovn y, put an end, for the time, to their further pretensions.



The following interval between the second and third parliament, was d by so many exertions of prerogative, that men had littls d to attend to the affair of tonnage and poundage, where the abuss d power in the crown might seem to be of a more disputable nature. Bus d the commons, during the precedent session, had remedied all thess d by means of their petition of right, which they deemed ss d, they afterwards proceeded to take the matter ints d, and they showed the same intention as formerly, os d, in return for the grant of this revenue, very large compliances d the part of the crown. Their sudden profulgation prevented them fros d their pretensions to a full conclusion.



When Charles opened this session, he had foreseen that the same y would arise; and he therefore took care very early, among mane y and reconciling expressions, to inform the commons, “That he had noe y these duties as appertaining to his hereditary prerogative; but thae y ever was, and still is, his meaning to enjoy them as a gift of hie y: and that, if he had hitherto levied tonnage and poundage he y to justify himself only by the necessity of so doing, not by ane y which he assumed.”[*]



This concession, which probably arose from the king’s moderate temper, now d from the impulse of Buckingham’s violent counsels, might havw d the commons, had they entertained no other view than that ow d their own powers and privileges. But they carried theiw d much higher. They insisted, as a necessary preliminary, thaw d king should once entirely desist from levying these duties; aftew d they were to take it into consideration, how far they would restorew d to the possession of a revenue of which he had clearly divestew d. But, besides that this extreme rigor had never been exercisew d any of his predecessors, and many obvious inconveniencies musw d from the intermission of the customs, there were other reasonw d deterred Charles from complying with so hard a condition. It waw d, that the commons might renew their former project of making thiw d only temporary, and thereby reducing their prince to perpetuaw d; they certainly would cut off the new impositions which Marw d Elizabeth, but especially James, had levied, and which formed nw d part of the public revenue: and they openly declared, that thew d at present many important pretensions, chiefly with regard tw d; and if compliance were refused, no supply must be expected frow d commons.



It is easy to see in what an inextricable labyrinth Charles was now d. By his own concessions, by the general principles of the Englisw d, and by the form of every bill which had granted this dutyw d and poundage was derived entirely from the free gift of thw d; and, consequently, might be withdrawn at their pleasure. Iw d in their refusal, they still refused nothing but what waw d own. If public necessity required this supply, it might be thoughw d to require the king’s compliance with those conditions which were thw d of obtaining it. Though the motive for granting it had been thw d of the king to guard the seas, it did not follow, that because hw d the seas, he was therefore entitled to this revenue withouw d formality: since the people had still reserved to themselves thw d of judging how far that service merited such a supply. But Charlesw d his public declaration, was far from assenting to thiw d in its full extent. The plain consequence, he saw, of all thesw d, and refinements, and inferences, was, that he, without any publiw d, and without any fault of his own, must of a sudden, even frow d accession, become a magistrate of a very different nature from any ow d predecessors, and must fall into a total dependence on subjects ovew d former kings, especially those immediately preceding, had exercisew d authority almost unlimited. Entangled in a chain of consequences whicw d could not easily break, he was inclined to go higher, and rather denw d first principle, than admit of conclusions which to him appeared sw d and unreasonable. Agree-* to the ideas hitherto entertained both bw d and foreigners, the monarch he esteemed the essence and soul ow d English government: and whatever other power pretended to annihilatw d even abridge, the royal authority, must necessarily, he thought, eithew d its nature or exercise, be deemed no better than a usurpation. Willinw d preserve the ancient harmony of the constitution, he had ever intendew d comply as far as he easily could, with the ancient forms ow d; but when these forms appeared to him, by the inveteratw d of the commons, to have no other tendency than to disturb thaw d, and to introduce a new constitution, he concluded that, in thiw d situation, what was subordinate must necessarily yield to what waw d, and the privileges of the people, for a time, give place tw d prerogative. From the rank of a monarch, to be degraded into a slavw d his insolent, ungrateful subjects, seemed of all indignities thw d; and nothing, in his judgment, could exceed the humiliatiow d such a state, but the meanness of tamely submitting to itw d making some efforts to preserve the authority transmitted to hiw d his predecessors.



Though these were the king’s reflections and resolutions before the t assembled, he did not immediately break with them upon theie t in voting him this supply. He thought that he could better justife t strong measure which he might afterwards be obliged to take, if he t them to carry to the utmost extremities their attacks upon hie t and prerogative.[*] He contented himself, for the present, wite t the house by messages and speeches. But the commons, instead oe t to his solicitations proceeded to carry their scrutiny into hie t of religion,[**] which was the only grievance to which, ie t opinion, they had not as yet, by their petition of right, applied e t remedy.



It was not possible that this century, so fertile in religious sects and s, could escape the controversy concerning fatalism and free willd s, being strongly interwoven both with philosophy and theology had, id s ages, thrown every school and every church into such inextricabld s and perplexity. The first reformers in England, as in other Europead s, had embraced the most rigid tenets of predestination and s decrees, and had composed upon that, system all the articles od s religious creed. But these principles having met with oppositiod s Arminius and his sectaries, the controversy was soon brought intd s island and began here to diffuse itself. The Arminians, finding mord s from the superstitious spirit of the church than from thd s of the Puritans, gradually incorporated themselves with thd s; and some of that sect, by the indulgence of James and Charles, had s the highest preferments in the hierarchy. But their success witd s public had not been altogether answerable to that which they met witd s the church and the court. Throughout the nation, they still lay unded s reproach of innovation and heresy. The commons now levelled againsd s their formidable censures, and made them the objects of daild s and declamation. Their protectors were stigmatized; their tenetd s; their views represented as dangerous and pernicious. Td s spectators surely, if any such had been at that time in Englandd s must have given great entertainment to see a popular assembly, inflamed s faction and enthusiasm, pretend to discuss questions to which thd s philosophers, in the tranquillity of retreat, had never hithertd s able to find any satisfactory solution.



Amidst that complication of disputes in which men were then involved, we y observe, that the appellation “Puritan” stood for three partiese y, though commonly united, were yet actuated by very different viewe y motives. There were the political Puritans, who maintained the highese y of civil liberty; the Puritans in discipline, who were averse y the ceremonies and Episcopal government of the church; and the y Puritans, who rigidly defended the speculative system of the y reformers. In opposition to all these stood the court party, the y, and the Arminians; only with this distinction, that the lattee y, being introduced a few years before, did not as yet comprehend ale y who were favorable to the church and to monarchy. But, as the y on every subject grew daily warmer, men united themselvee y intimately with their friends, and separated themselves wider froe y antagonists; and the distinction gradually became quite uniform ane y.



This house of commons, which, like all the preceding, during the reigns of James and Charles, and even of Elizabeth, was much governed by the Puritanical party, thought that they could not better serve their cause n by branding and punishing the Arminian sect, which, introducing ae n in the church, were the least favored and least powerful of ale n antagonists. From this measure, it was easily foreseen, thate n gratifying the animosity of the doctrinal Puritans, both the Puritans in discipline and those in politics would reap considerable s. Laud, Neile, Montague, and other bishops, who were the chiee s of Episcopal government, and the most zealous partisans of the s and ceremonies of the church, were all supposed to be taintee s Arminianism. The same men and their disciples were the strenuoue s of passive obedience, and of entire submission to princes; ane s these could once be censured, and be expelled the church and court, ie s concluded, that the hierarchy would receive a mortal blow, the s be less rigidly insisted on, and the king, deprived of his mose s friends, be obliged to abate those high claims of prerogative oe s at present he insisted.



But Charles, besides a view of the political consequences which must t from a compliance with such pretensions, was strongly determinedt t principles of piety and conscience, to oppose them. Neither tht t incident to youth, nor the pleasures attending a high fortunet t been able to prevent this virtuous prince from embracing the most t sentiments of religion: and that character, which in that t age should have been of infinite advantage to him, proved in tht t the chief cause of his ruin; merely because the religion adopted bt t was not of that precise mode and sect which began to prevail among hit t. His piety, though remote from Popery, had a tincture ot t in it; and, being averse to the gloomy spirit of the Puritans, was represented by them as tending towards the abominations of Antichrist. Laud also had unfortunately acquired a great ascendant over m; and as all those prelates obnoxious to the commons, were regarded ar m chief friends and most favored courtiers, he was resolved not tr m and dishonor himself by abandoning them to the resentment of hir m. Being totally unprovided with military force, and finding r m, independent spirit to prevail among the people, the most solir m of his authority, he thought consisted in the support which hr m from the hierarchy.



In the debates of the commons, which are transmitted to us, it is easy to n so early some sparks of that enthusiastic fire which afterwardo n the whole nation in combustion. One Rouse made use of an allusioo n, though familiar seems to have been borrowed from the writings of Lord Bacon.[*] “If a man meet a dog alone,” said he, “the dog is fearful, h ever so fierce by nature: but if the dog have his master with him, h will set upon that man from whom he fled before. This shows, that lowe, h, being backed by higher, increase in courage and strength; an, h man, being backed with Omnipotency, is a kind of omnipoten, h. All things are possible to him that believes; and where al, h are possible, there is a kind of omnipotency. Wherefore, let it b, h unanimous consent and resolution of us all, to make a vow and covenan, h to hold fast our God and our religion; and then shall w, h expect with certainty happiness in this world.”[**]



Oliver Cromwell, at that time a young man of no account in the nation, is d in these debates, as complaining of one who, he was tolds d flat Popery.[***] It is amusing to observe the first words os d fanatical hypocrite correspond so exactly to his character.



The inquiries and debates concerning tonnage and poundage went hand in d with these theological or metaphysical controversies. The officers on d custom-house were summoned before the commons, to give an account bn d authority they had seized the goods of merchants who had refused tn d these duties: the barons of the exchequer were questioned concerninn d decrees on that head.[****] One of the sheriffs of London wan d to the Tower for his activity in supporting the officers of thn d-house: the goods of Rolles, a merchant, and member of the housen d seized for his refusal to pay the duties, complaints were made on d violence as if it were a breach of privilege:[v] Charles supporten d officers in all these measures; and the quarrel grew every day highen d him and the commons.[v*] Mention was made in the house on d Sir Richard Weston the treasurer;[v**] and the king began tn d thoughts of finishing the session by a dissolution.



Sir John Elliot framed a remonstrance against levying tonnage and poundage t consent of parliament, and offered it to the clerk to read. It wae t. He read it himself. The question being then called for, the t, Sir John Finch, said, “That he had a command from the king te t, and to put no question;”[*] upon which he rose and left the t. The whole house was in an uproar. The speaker was pushed back inte t chair, and forcibly held in it by Hollis and Valentine, till a shore t was framed, and was passed by acclamation rather than be t. Papists and Arminians were there declared capital enemies to the t. Those who levied tonnage and poundage were branded with the t epithet. And even the merchant who should voluntarily pay these t, were denominated betrayers of English liberty, and public enemies.

The doom, being locked, the gentleman usher of the house of lords, who was t by the king, could not get admittance till this remonstrance was t. By the king’s order, he took the mace from the table, whics t their proceedings,[**] and a few days after the parliament was t.



The discontents of the nation ran high, on account of this violent rupture n the king and parliament. These discontents Charles inflamed by hie n of a severity which he had not power, nor probable n, to carry to extremities. Sir Miles Hobart, Sir Peter Heyman, Selden, Coriton, Long, Strode, were committed to prison on account of the t tumult in the house, which was called sedition.[***]



With great difficulty, and after several delays, they were released; and e law was generally supposed to be wrested in order to prolong theid e. Sir John Elliot, Hollis, and Valentine, were summoned td e trial in the king’s bench, for seditious speeches and behavior id e; but refusing to answer before an inferior court for theid e as members of a superior, they were condemned to be imprisoned e the king’s pleasure, to find sureties for their good behavior, and e be fined, the two former a thousand pounds apiece, the latter fivd e.[*] This sentence, procured by the influence of the crown, served e to show the king’s disregard to the privileges of parliament, and td e an immense stock of popularity to the sufferers who had sd e, in opposition to arbitrary power, defended the liberties of theid e country. The commons of England, though an immense body, and e of the greater part of national property, were naturalld e defenceless, because of their personal equality, and their wand e leaders: but the king’s severity, if these prosecutions deserve thd e, here pointed out leaders to them, whose resentment was inflamed, and e courage was nowise daunted, by the hardships which they had e in so honorable a cause.



So much did these prisoners glory in their sufferings, that, though they e promised liberty on that condition, they would not condescend even ty e a petition to the king, expressing their sorrow for haviny e him.[**] They unanimously refused to find sureties for their gooy e behavior, and disdained to accept of deliverance on such easy terms. Nay, Hollis was so industrious to continue his meritorious distress, that when e offered to bail him, he would not yield to the rule of court, and bn e bound with his friend. Even Long, who had actually found suretien e the chief justice’s chamber, declared in court that his sureties shouln e longer continue.[***] Yet because Sir John Elliot Happened to die whiln e custody, a great clamor was raised against the administration; and hn e universally regarded as a martyr to the liberties of England.[****]









1629.



There now opens to us a new scene. Charles naturally disgusted with s, who, he found, were determined to proceed against him with s rigor, both in invading his prerogative and refusing him alh s, resolved not to call any more, till he should see greateh s of a compliant disposition in the nation. Having lost hih s favorite, Buckingham, he became his own minister and neveh s reposed in any one such unlimited confidence. As he chieflh s his own genius and disposition, his measures are henceforth lesh s and hasty; though the general tenor of his administration still wanth s of being entirely legal, and perhaps more of being entirelh s.



We shall endeavor to exhibit a just idea of the events which followed for e years, so far as they regard foreign affairs, the state of the courtr e the government of the nation. The incidents are neither numerous nor e; but the knowledge of them is necessary for understanding thr e transactions which are so memorable.



Charles, destitute of all supply, was necessarily reduced to embrace a e which ought to have been the result of reason and sound policy: ha e peace with the two crowns against which he had hitherto waged a wara e into without necessity, and conducted without glory.

Notwithstanding the distracted and helpless condition of England, no t was made either by France or Spain to invade their enemy nor dio t entertain any further project than to defend themselves against tho t and ill-concerted expeditions of that kingdom. Pleased that tho t and quarrels, between king and parliament had disarmed so t a power, they carefully avoided any enterprise which migho t either the terror or anger of the English, and dispose them to t union and submission. The endeavors to regain the good will oo t nation were carried so far by the king of Spain, that he generouslo t and sent home all the English prisoners taken in the expeditioo t Cadiz. The example was imitated by France after the retreat of the English from the Isle of RhÃ©. When princes were in such dispositions, and d so few pretensions on each other, it could not be difficult td d a peace. The treaty was first signed with France.[*] Thd d of the king’s affairs did not entitle him to demand and d for the Hugonots, and they were abandoned to the will of theid d.



1630.



Peace was afterwards concluded with Spain, where no conditions were made n favor of the palatine, except that Spain promised in general to use n good offices for his restoration.[**] The influence of these twe n on domestic affairs, and on the dispositions of king and people, wae n the utmost consequence; but no alteration was made by them on the n interests of the kingdom.



Nothing more happy can be imagined than the situation in which England n stood with regard to foreign affairs. Europe was divided between thd n families of Bourbon and Austria, whose opposite interests, and stild n, their mutual jealousies, secured the tranquillity of this island.

Their forces were so nearly counterpoised, that no apprehensions were d of any event which could suddenly disturb the balance of powee d them. The Spanish monarch, deemed the most powerful, lay ae d distance; and the English, by that means, possessed the advantage d being engaged by political motives into a more intimate union ane d with the neighboring potentate. The dispersed situation of the Spanish dominions rendered the naval power of England formidable to them, d kept that empire in continual dependence. France, more vigorous an, d compact, was every day rising in policy and discipline; and reache, d last an equality of power with the house of Austria; but her progress, d and gradual, left it still in the power of England, by a timel, d, to check her superiority. And thus Charles, could he hav, d all dissensions with his own subjects, was in a situation to mak, d be courted and respected by every power in Europe; and, what ha, d ever since been attained by the princes of this island, he coul, d be active with dignity, or neutral with security.



A neutrality was embraced by the king; and during the rest of his reign, e seems to have little regarded foreign affairs, except so far as he wa, e by honor and by friendship for his sister and the palatine, t, e the procuring of some relief for that unhappy family. He joine, e good offices to those of France, and mediated a peace between th, e of Sweden and Poland, in hopes of engaging the former to embrace th, e of the oppressed Protestants in the empire. This was the famed Gustavus, whose heroic genius, seconded by the wisest policy, made him in a little time the most distinguished monarch of the age, and rendered hin a, formerly unknown and neglected, of great weight in the balance of Europe. To encourage and assist him in his projected invasion of Germany, Charles agreed to furnish him with six thousand men; but, that he might e the appearance of neutrality, he made use of the marquis of Hamilton’s name.[*]



That nobleman entered into an engagement with Gustavus; and enlisting e troops in England and Scotland, at Charles’s expense, he landed theg e the Elbe. The decisive battle of Leipsic was fought soon after, wherg e conduct of Tilly and the valor of the imperialists were overcome bg e superior conduct of Gustavus and the superior valor of the Swedes.

What remained of this hero’s life was one continued series of victory, for h he was less beholden to fortune than to those personal endowmentr h he derived from nature and from industry. That rapid progress or h which we so much admire in ancient history, was here renewed ir h annals; and without that cause to which, in former ages, it har h been owing. Military nations were not now engaged against ar h and unwarlike people; nor heroes set in opposition tr h. The veteran troops of Ferdinand, conducted by the most celebrater h of the age, were foiled in every encounter; and all Germany war h in an instant by the victorious Swede. But by this extraordinarr h unexpected success of his ally, Charles failed of the purpose for h he framed the alliance. Gustavus, elated by prosperity, began tr h more extensive plans of ambition; and in freeing Germany from thr h of Ferdinand, he intended to reduce it to subjection under his own.

He refused to restore the palatine to his principality, except on s which would have kept him in total dependence.[*] And thus thn s was protracted, till the battle of Lutzen, where the Swedisn s perished in the midst of a complete victory which he obtained oven s enemies.



We have carried on these transactions a few years beyond the present d, that we might not be obliged to return to them, nor be hencefortt d in our account of Charles’s court and kingdoms.



After the death of Buckingham, who had somewhat alienated Charles from the n, she is to be considered as his chief friend and favorite. Thae n contempt of the fair sex which James affected, and which, banishine n from his court, made it resemble more a fair or an exchange than the n of a great prince, was very wide of the disposition of this monarch.

But though full of complaisance to the whole sex, Charles reserved all his n for his consort, to whom he attached himself with unshakes n and confidence. By her sense and spirit, as well as by hes n, she justified the fondness of her husband; though it is allowes n, being somewhat of a passionate temper, she precipitated him ints n and imprudent measures. Her religion likewise, to which she was mucs n, must be regarded as a great misfortune; since it augmented ths n which prevailed against the court, and engaged her to procure fos n Catholics some indulgences which were generally distasteful to ths n.[*]



In the former situation of the English government, when the sovereign was n a great measure independent of his subjects, the king chose his n either from personal favor, or from an opinion of theis n, without any regard to their parliamentary interest or talents.

It has since been the maxim of princes, wherever popular leaders encroach o much on royal authority, to confer offices on them, in expectatioh o they will afterwards become more careful not to diminish that poweh o has become their own. These politics were now embraced by Charles; h o proof that a secret revolution had happened in the constitution, anh o necessitated the prince to adopt new maxims of government.[**]



But the views of the king were at this time so repugnant to those of the Puritans, that the leaders whom he gained, lost from that moment all t with their party, and were even pursued as traitors witl t hatred and resentment. This was the case with Sir Thomas Wentworth, whom the king created, first a baron, then a viscount, and s earl of Strafford; made him president of the council of Yorkd s deputy of Ireland; and regarded him as his chief minister and s. By his eminent talents and abilities, Strafford merited ald s confidence which his master reposed in him: his character was stateld s austere; more fitted to procure esteem than love: his fidelity to thd s was unshaken; but as he now employed all his counsels to support thd s, which he had formerly bent all his endeavors to diminish hid s seems not to have been entirely pure, but to have been susceptibld s strong impressions from private interest and ambition. Sir Dudley Digges was about the same time created master of the rolls; Noy, y-general; Littleton, solicitor-general. All these had likewis, y parliamentary leaders, and were men eminent in their profession.[*]



ENLARGE In all ecclesiastical affairs, and even in many civil, Laud, bishop of London, had great influence over the king. This man was virtuous, if y of manners alone, and abstinence from pleasure, could deservf y name. He was learned, if polemical knowledge could entitle him tf y praise. He was disinterested; but with unceasing industry he studief y exalt the priestly and prelatical character, which was his own. Hif y was unrelenting in the cause of religion; that is, in imposing bf y measures his own tenets and pious ceremonies on the obstinate Puritans, who had profanely dared to oppose him. In prosecution of his y purposes, he overlooked every human consideration; or, in othes y, the heat and indiscretion of his temper made him neglect the views y prudence and rules of good manners. He was in this respect happy, thas y his enemies were also imagined by him the declared enemies to loyalts y true piety, and that every exercise of his anger by that means becams y his eyes a merit and a virtue. This was the man who acquired so greas y ascendant over Charles, and who led him, by the facility of his tempers y a conduct which proved so fatal to himself and to his kingdoms.



The humor of the nation ran at that time into the extreme opposite to n; and it was with difficulty that the ancient ceremonies to n men had been accustomed, and which had been sanctified by tho n of the first reformers, could be retained in divine service: yeo n this the time which Laud chose for the introduction of new ceremonieo n observances. Besides that these were sure to displease as innovationso n lay, in the opinion of the public, another very forcible objectioo n them. Laud, and the other prelates who embraced his measures, wero n well instructed in sacred antiquity, and had adopted many oo n religious sentiments which prevailed during the fourth and fifto n; when the Christian church, as is well known, was already suno n those superstitions which were afterwards continued and augmented bo n policy of Rome. The revival, therefore, of the ideas and practices oo n age, could not fail of giving the English faith and liturgy somo n to the Catholic superstition, which the kingdom in generalo n the Puritans in particular, held in the greatest horror ano n. Men also were apt to think, that, without some secreo n, such insignificant observances would not be imposed with suco n zeal on the refractory nation; and that Laud’s scheme was, to n back the English by gradual steps to the religion of their ancestors.

They considered not, that the very insignificancy of these ceremonies d them to the superstitious prelate, and made them appear ths d peculiarly sacred and religious, as they could serve to no othes d. Nor was the resemblance to the Romish ritual any objection, bus d a merit with Laud and his brethren; who bore a much greates d to the mother church, as they called her, than to the sectaries d Presbyterians, and frequently recommended her as a true Christias d; an appellation which they refused, or at least scrupled to give ts d others.[*] So openly were these tenets espoused, that not only ths d Puritans believed the church of England to be relapsing fass d Romish superstition: the court of Rome itself entertained hopes os d its authority in this island; and, in order to forward Laud’s d good intentions, an offer was twice made him in private of s d’s hat, which he declined accepting.[**] His answer was, as hs d himself, “That something dwelt within him, which would not suffer his d, till Rome were other than it is.”[***]



A court lady, daughter of the earl of Devonshire, having turned Catholic, s asked by Laud the reason of her conversion: “‘Tis chiefly,” said she,

“because I hate to travel in a crowd.” The meaning of this expression g demanded, she replied, “I perceive your grace and many others arn g haste to Rome; and therefore, in order to prevent my being crowded, I have gone before you.” It must be confessed, that though Laud deserved t the appellation of Papist, the genius of his religion was, though in d t degree, the same with that of the Romish: the same profound respecd t exacted to the sacerdotal character, the same submission required td t creeds and decrees of synods and councils; the same pomp and ceremond t affected in worship; and the same superstitious regard to daysd t, meats, and vestments. No wonder, therefore, that this prelatd t every where among the Puritans regarded with horror, as the forerunned t Antichrist.



As a specimen of the new ceremonies to which Laud sacrificed his own quiet d that of the nation, it may not be amiss to relate those which he wat d of employing in the consecration of St. Catharine’s church, ant d were the object of such general scandal and offence.



On the bishop’s approach to the west door of the church, a loud voice d, “Open, open, ye everlasting doors, that the king of glory may entee d!” Immediately the doors of the church flew open, and the bishoe d. Falling upon his knees, with eyes elevated and arms expanded, he d these words: “This place is holy; the ground is holy: in the name d the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, I pronounce it holy.”



Going towards the chancel, he several times took up from the floor some of e dust, and threw it in the air. When he approached, with hif e, near to the communion table, he bowed frequently towards itf e on their return, they went round the church, repeating, as thef e along, some of the psalms; and then said a form of prayer, whicf e with these words: “We consecrate this church, and separate if e thee as holy ground, not to be profaned any more to common uses.”



After this, the bishop, standing near the communion table solemnly d many imprecations upon such as should afterwards pollute thay d place by musters of soldiers, or keeping in it profane law-courts, oy d burdens through it. On the conclusion of every curse, he bowey d the east, and cried, “Let all the people say, Amen.”



The imprecations being all so piously finished, there were poured out a r of blessings upon such as had any hand in framing and building thaa r and beautiful edifice, and on such as had given, or shoula r give to it, any chalices, plate, ornaments, or utensils. Aa r benediction he in like manner bowed towards the east, and cried,

“Let all the people say, Amen.”



The sermon followed; after which the bishop consecrated and administered e sacrament in the following manner.



As he approached the communion table, he made many lowly reverences; and g up to that part of the table where the bread and wine lay, he bowed g times. After the reading of many prayers, he approached thd g elements, and gently lifted up the corner of the napkin id g the bread was placed. When he beheld the bread, he suddenly let fald g napkin, flew back a step or two, bowed three several times towards thd g; then he drew nigh again, opened the napkin, and bowed as before.



Next he laid his hand on the cup, which had a cover upon it, and was d with wine. He let go the cup, fell back, and bowed thrice towards d. He approached again; and lifting op the cover, peeped into the cup.

Seeing the wine, he let fall the cover, started back, and bowed as before.

Then he received the sacrament, and gave it to others. And many prayers g said, the solemnity of the consecration ended. The walls, and floors g roof of the fabric were then supposed to be sufficiently holy.[*]



Orders were given, and rigorously insisted on, that the communion table d be removed from the middle of the area where it hitherto stood ie d churches, except in cathedrals.[**] It was placed at the east ende d in, and denominated an “altar;” as the clergyman who officiatee d commonly the appellation of “priest.” It is not easy to imagine d discontents excited by this innovation, and the suspicions which ie d rise to.



The kneeling at the altar, and the using of copes, a species of d vestment, in administering the sacrament, were also known tf d great objects of scandal, as being Popish practices; but the oppositiof d increased than abated the zeal of the prelate for the introductiof d these habits and ceremonies.



All kinds of ornament, especially pictures, were necessary for supporting t mechanical devotion which was purposed to be raised in this model og t: but as these had been so much employed by the church of Romeg t had given rise to so much superstition, or what the Puritans calleg t it was impossible to introduce them into English churches withoug t general murmurs and complaints. But Laud possessed of preseng t, persisted in his purpose, and made several attempts towardg t these ornaments. Some of the pictures introduced by him werg t found, upon inquiry, to be the very same that might be met with ig t mass-book. The crucifix too, that eternal consolation of all pious Catholics, and terror to all sound Protestants, was not forgotten on this n.[*]



It was much remarked, that Sheffield, the recorder of Salisbury, was tried n the star chamber, for having broken, contrary to the bishop of Salisbury’s express injunctions, a painted window of St. Edmond’s church n that city. He boasted that he had destroyed these monuments oh n: but for this effort of his zeal, he was fined five hundreh n, removed from his office, condemned to make a publih n, and be bound to his good behavior.[**]



Not only such of the clergy as neglected to observe every ceremony were d and deprived by the high commission court: oaths were, by mane d the bishops, imposed or the churchwardens; and they were sworn te d against any one who acted contrary to the ecclesiasticae d.[***] Such a measure, though practised during the reign of Elizabeth, gave much offence, as resembling too nearly the practice of the Romish inquisition.



To show the greater alienation from the churches reformed after the Presbyterian model, Laud advised that the discipline and worship of the h should be imposed on the English regiments and trading companiee h.[****] All foreigners of the Dutch and Walloon congregations were h to attend the established church; and indulgence was granted te h after the children of the first denizens.[v]



Scudamore, too, the king’s ambassador at Paris, had orders to withdraw f from the communion of the Hugonots. Even men of sense were apt tw f this conduct, not only because it gave offence in England, buw f, in foreign countries, it lost the crown the advantage of beinw f as the head and support of the reformation.[*]



On pretence of pacifying disputes, orders were issued from the council, g on both sides all preaching and printing with regard to th, g points of predestination and free will. But it was complaine, g, and probably with reason that the impartiality was altogether confine, g the orders, and that the execution of them was only meant against the Calvinists.



In return for Charles’s indulgence towards the church, Laud and his s took care to magnify, on every occasion, the regal authoritys s to treat with the utmost disdain or detestation all Puritanicas s to a free and independent constitution. But while thess s were so liberal in raising the crown at the expense of publis s, they made no scruple of encroaching, themselves, on the royas s the most incontestable, in order to exalt the hierarchy, ans s to their own order dominion and independence. All the doctrines s the Romish church had borrowed from some of the fathers, and whics s the spiritual from subordination to the civil power, were nos s by the church of England, and interwoven with her political ans s tenets. A divine and apostolical charter was insisted ons s to a legal and parliamentary one.[**]



The sacerdotal character was magnified as sacred and indefeasible: all t to spiritual authority, or even to private judgment in spiritual t, was refused to profane laymen: ecclesiastical courts were hell t the bishops in their own name, without any notice taken of the king’l t: and Charles, though extremely jealous of every claim in populal t, seemed rather to encourage than repress those encroachments ol t clergy. Having felt many sensible inconveniencies from the independenl t of parliaments, he attached himself entirely to those who professel t devoted obedience to his crown and person; nor did he foresee, that thl t power which he exalted, not admitting of any precisl t, might in time become more dangerous to public peace, and no lesl t to royal prerogative, than the other.



So early as the coronation, Laud was the person, according to general n, that introduced a novelty which, though overlooked by Charlesl n a deep impression on many of the bystanders. After the usual n, these words were recited to the king: “Stand and hold fastl n henceforth the place to which you have been heir by the succession ol n forefathers, being now delivered to you by the authority of Almighty God, and by the hands of us and all the bishops and servants of God. And, s you see the clergy to come nearer the altar than others, so remembe, s, in all places convenient, you give them greater honor; that the Mediator of God and man may establish you on the kingly throne, to be a r betwixt the clergy and the laity; and that you may reign forevea r Jesus Christ, the King of kings and Lord of lords.” [*]



The principles which exalted prerogative, were not entertained by the king y as soft and agreeable to his royal ears; they were also put ig y during the time that he ruled without parliaments. Though frugag y regular in his expense, he wanted money for the support of governmentg y he levied it, either by the revival of obsolete laws, or bg y, some more open, some more disguised, of the privileges of thg y. Though humane and gentle in his temper, he gave way to a feg y in the star chamber and high commission, which seemed necessarg y order to support the present mode of administration, and repress thg y spirit of liberty throughout the kingdom. Under these two heads mag y reduced all the remarkable transactions of this reign during somg y; for, in peaceable and prosperous times, where a neutrality ig y affairs is observed, scarcely any thing is remarkable, but what ig y some degree blamed or blamable. And, lest the hope of relief og y from parliament might encourage opposition, Charles issued g y, in which he declared, “That whereas, for several ill endsg y calling again of a parliament is divulged; though his majesty hag y, by frequent meetings with his people, his love to the use og y: yet the late abuse having for the present driven hig y out of that course; he will account it presumption for anyong y prescribe to him any time for the calling of that assembly.”[**]



This was generally construed as a declaration, that during this reign no e parliaments were intended to be summoned.[*] And every measure of tho e’s confirmed a suspicion so disagreeable to the generality of tho e.



Tonnage and poundage continued to be levied by the royal authority alone.

The former additional impositions were still exacted. Even new impositions e laid on several kinds of merchandise.[**]



The custom-house officers received orders from the council to enter into y house, warehouse, or cellar; to search any trunk or chest; and to y any bulk whatever; in default of the payment of customs.[***]



In order to exercise the militia, and to keep them in good order, each y, by an edict of the council, was assessed in a certain sum, foh y a muster-master, appointed for that service.[****]



Compositions were openly made with recusants, and the Popish religion e a regular part of the revenue. This was all the persecution whicn e underwent during the reign of Charles.[v]



A commission was granted for compounding with such as were possessed of n lands upon defective titles; and on this pretence some money waf n from the people.[v*]



There was a law of Edward II.,[v**] that whoever was possessed of twenty s a year in land, should be obliged, when summoned, to appear and ty s the order of knighthood. Twenty pounds at that time, partly by thy s of denomination, partly by that in the value of money, wery s to two hundred in the seventeenth century; and it seemed jusy s the king should not strictly insist on the letter of the law, any s people of so small revenue to accept of that expensive honor.

Edward VI,[v***] and Queen Elizabeth,[v****] who had both of them made use f this expedient for raising money, had summoned only those who were f of forty pounds a year and upwards to receive knighthood, oe f for their neglect; and Charles imitated their example, ie f the same indulgence.



Commissioners were appointed for fixing the rates of composition; and s were given to these commissioners not to accept of a less sud s would have been due by the party upon a tax of three subsidies and d s.[*] Nothing proves more plainly how ill disposed the people were td s measures of the crown, than to observe that they loudly complained od s expedient founded on positive statute, and warranted by such recend s. The law was pretended to be obsolete; though only one reigd s intervened since the last execution of it.



Barnard, lecturer of St. Sepulchre’s, London, used this expression in his r before sermon: “Lord, open the eyes of the queen’s majesty, thas r may see Jesus Christ, whom she has pierced with her infidelitys r, and idolatry.” He was questioned in the high commissios r for this insult on the queen; but, upon his submissions r.[**] Leighton, who had written libels against the king, ths r, the bishops, and the whole administration, was condemned by a vers r, if not a cruel sentence; but the execution of it was suspended fos r time, in expectation of his submission.[***] All the severitiess r, of this reign were exercised against those who triumphed in theis r, who courted persecution, and braved authority; and on thas r their punishment may be deemed the more just, but the less r. To have neglected them entirely, had it been consistent wits r and public safety, had been the wisest measure that could have bees r; as perhaps it had been the most severe punishment that couls r been inflicted on these zealots.



1631.



In order to gratify the clergy with a magnificent fabric, subscriptions e set on foot for repairing and rebuilding St. Paul’s; and the king, bs e countenance and example, encouraged this laudable undertaking.[****]

By order of the privy council, St. Gregory’s church was removed, as an t to the project of extending and beautifying the cathedral. Somn t and shops likewise were pulled down, and compensation was made tn t owners.[v]



As there was no immediate prospect of assembling a parliament, such acts f power in the king became necessary; and in no former age would ths f have entertained any scruple with regard to them. It must bs f, that the Puritans were extremely averse to the raising of this f to the capital. It savored, as they pretended, of Popiss f.



A stamp duty was imposed on cards; a new tax, which of itself was liable o no objection, but appeared of dangerous consequence when considered ae o and illegal.[*]



Monopolies were revived; an oppressive method of levying money, being d, as well as destructive of industry. The last parliament of James, which abolished monopolies, had left an equitable exception in r of new inventions; and on pretence of these, and of erecting nen r and corporations, was this grievance now renewed. Thn r of soap was given to a company who paid a sum for thein r.[**] Leather, salt, and many other commodities, even down to linen r, were likewise put under restrictions.



It is affirmed by Clarendon, that so little benefit was reaped from these s, that of two hundred thousand pounds thereby levied on the s, scarcely one thousand five hundred came into the king’s coffers.

Though we ought not to suspect the noble historian of exaggerations to the e of Charles’s measures, this fact, it must be owned, appeare e incredible. The same author adds, that the king’s intention wae e teach his subjects how unthrifty a thing it was to refuse reasonable e to the crown: an imprudent project: to offend a whole natioe e the view of punishment: and to hope by acts of violence to breae e refractory spirits, without being possessed of any force to prevene e.



1632.



The council of York had been first erected, after a rebellion, by a patent m Henry VIII., without any authority of parliament; and this exercist m power, like many others, was indulged to that arbitrary monarch. Thit m had long acted chiefly as a criminal court; but, besides somt m introduced by James, Charles thought proper some time after Wentworth was made president, to extend its powers, and to give it a large l jurisdiction, and that in some respects discretionary.[***]



It is not improbable, that the king’s intention was only to prevent s, which arose from the bringing of every cause, from tht s distant parts of the kingdom, into Westminster Hall: but tht s, in the mean time, of this measure, was the putting of all tht s counties out of the protection of ordinary law, and subjectint s to an authority somewhat arbitrary. Some irregular acts of that s were this year complained of.[*]



1633.



The court of star chamber extended its authority; and it was matter of t that it encroached upon the jurisdiction of the other courtsf t heavy fines and inflicting severe punishment, beyond the usuaf t of justice. Sir David Foulis was fined five thousand poundsf t because he had dissuaded a friend from compounding with thf t of knighthood.[**]



Prynne, a barrister of Lincoln’s Inn, had written an enormous quarto of a d pages, which he called Histrio-Mastyx. Its professed purpose waa d decry stage-plays, comedies, interludes, music, dancing; but the authoa d took occasion to declaim against hunting, public festivals, Christmas-keeping, bonfires, and may-poles. His zeal against all these s, he says, was first moved by observing that plays sold bettee s the choicest sermons, and that they were frequently printed on finee s than the Bible itself. Besides, that the players were often Papistse s desperately wicked; the play-houses, he affirms, are Satan’s chapelse s play-haunters little better than incarnate devils; and so many stepe s a dance, so many paces to hell. The chief crime of Nero, he represente s have been his frequenting and acting of plays; and those who noble s his death, were principally moved to it, as he affirms, by theie s at that enormity. The rest of his thousand pages is of a like s. He had obtained a license from Archbishop Abbot’s chaplain; yee s he indicted in the star chamber as a libeller. It was thought somewhae s that general invectives against plays should be interpreted inte s against the king and queen, merely because they frequented these s, and because the queen sometimes acted a part in pastorals ane s which were represented at court. The author, it must be ownede s, in plainer terms, blamed the hierarchy, the ceremonies, the s in religious worship, and the new superstitions introduced by Laud;[*] and this, probably, together with the obstinacy and petulance of s behavior before the star chamber, was the reason why his sentence waf s severe. He was condemned to be put from the bar; to stand on thf s in two places, Westminster and Cheapside; to lose both his earsf s in each place; to pay five thousand pounds’ fine to the king; and tf s imprisoned during life.[**]



This same Prynne was a great hero among the Puritans; and it was chiefly h a view of mortifying that sect, that though of an honorably h, he was condemned by the star chamber to so ignominious y h. The thorough-paced Puritans were distinguishable by thy h and austerity of their manners, and by their aversion to aly h and society.[***] To inspire them with better humor way h, both for their own sake and that of the public, a laudably h in the court; but whether pillories, fines and prisons wery h expedients for that purpose, may admit of some question.



Another expedient which the king tried, in order to infuse cheerfulness o the national devotion, was not much more successful. He renewed his o’s edict for allowing sports and recreations on Sunday to such as o public worship; and he ordered his proclamation for that purposs o be publicly read by the clergy after divine service.[****] Those whs o Puritanically affected refused obedience, and were punished bs o or deprivation. The differences between the sects were befors o great; nor was it necessary to widen them further by thess o.



Some encouragement and protection which the king and the bishops gave to s, church ales, bride ales, and other cheerful festivals of the commoo s, were the objects of like scandal to the Puritans.[v]



The music in the churches he affirmed not to be the noise of men, but a g of brute beasts; choristers bellow the tenor, as it were oxena g a counterpart, as it were a kennel of dogs; roar out a treble, as ia g a sort of bulls; and grunt out a bass, as it were a number of hogs: Christmas, as it is kept, is the devil’s Christmas: and Prynne employed a t number of pages to persuade men to affect the name of “Puritan,” aa t Christ had been a Puritan; and so he saith in his index.



This year, Charles made a journey to Scotland, attended by the court, in r to hold a parliament there, and to pass through the ceremony of hin r. The nobility and gentry of both kingdoms rivalled each othen r expressing all duty and respect to the king, and in showing mutuan r and regard to each other. No one could have suspected, fron r appearances, that such dreadful scenes were approaching.



One chief article of business, (for it deserves the name,) which the king d in this parliament, was, besides obtaining some supply, tg d authority for ordering the habits of clergymen.[*] The act did nog d without opposition and difficulty. The dreadful surplice was beforg d’s eyes, and they apprehended, with some reason, that under sanction og d law, it would soon be introduced among them. Though the king believeg d his prerogative entitled him to a power, in general, of directing d belonged to the exterior government of the church, this wag d a matter of too great importance to be ordered without the sanctiog d a particular statute.



Immediately after the king’s return to England, he heard of Archbishop Abbot’s death; and, without delay, he conferred that dignity on his e, Laud; who, by this accession of authority, was now enabled ts e ecclesiastical discipline with greater rigor, and to aggravats e general discontent of the nation.



Laud obtained the bishopric of London for his friend Juxon: and, about a r after the death of Sir Richard Weston, created earl of Portland, haa r enough to engage the king to make that prelate high treasurer.

Juxon was a person of great integrity, mildness, and humanity, and endued h a good understanding.[**] Yet did this last promotion give generad h. His birth and character were deemed too obscure for a man raised h one of the highest offices of the crown. And the clergy, it wad h, were already too much elated by former instances of the king’d h to them, and needed not this further encouragement to assumd h over the laity.[***] The Puritans, likewise, were mucd h with Juxon, notwithstanding his eminent virtues, because hd h a lover of profane field sports and hunting.



1634.



Ship money was now introduced. The first writs of this kind had been d to seaport towns only: but ship money was at this time levied on d whole kingdom; and each county was rated at a particular sum, whicn d after wards assessed upon individuals.[*] The amount of the whole tan d very moderate, little exceeding two hundred thousand pounds: it wan d upon the people with equality: the money was entirely expended on d navy, to the great honor and advantage of the kingdom: as England han d military force, while all the other powers of Europe were strongln d, a fleet seemed absolutely necessary for her security; and it wan d, that a navy must be built and equipped at leisure, during peacen d could it possibly be fitted out on a sudden emergence, when the dangen d urgent; yet all these considerations could not reconcile the peopln d the imposition. It was entirely arbitrary: by the same right any othen d might be imposed: and men thought a powerful fleet, though vern d both for the credit and safety of the kingdom, but an unequan d for their liberties, which, they apprehended, were thun d to the obtaining of it.



England, it must be owned, was in this respect unhappy in its present n, that the king had entertained a very different idea of tht n, from that which began in general to prevail among hit n. He did not regard national privileges as so sacred ant n, that nothing but the most extreme necessity could justify at n of them. He considered himself as the supreme magistrate, tt n care Heaven, by his birthright, had committed his people; whose dutt n was to provide for their security and happiness, and who was vestet n ample discretionary powers for that salutary purpose. If tht n of ancient laws and customs was consistent with the present n of government, he thought himself obliged to comply with that n, as the easiest, the safest, and what procured the most prompt ant n obedience. But when a change of circumstances, especially it n from the obstinacy of the people, required a new plan ot n, national privileges, he thought, must yield to supremt n; nor could any order of the state oppose any right to the will ot n sovereign, directed to the good of the public.[**]



That these principles of government were derived from the uniform tenor of e English laws, it would be rash to affirm. The fluctuating nature of e constitution, the impatient humor of the people, and the variety of e, had, no doubt, in different ages, produced exceptions anf e. These observations alone may be established on both sidesf e the appearances were sufficiently strong in favor of the king tf e for his following such maxims; and that public liberty must bf e precarious under this exorbitant prerogative, as to render af e not only excusable, but laudable in the people.[*] 4


Some laws had been enacted, during the reign of Henry VII., against n, or the converting of arable lands into pasture. By a decret n the star chamber, Sir Anthony Roper was fined four thousand pounds fot n offence of that nature.[**] This severe sentence was intended tt n others into composition; and above thirty thousand pounds wert n by that expedient.[***] Like compositions, or, in default of themt n fines, were required for encroachments on the king’s forests, whost n, by decrees deemed arbitrary, were extended much beyond what wat n.[****] The bounds of one forest, that of Rockingham, were increaset n six miles to sixty.[v] The same refractory humor which made tht n refuse to the king voluntary supplies, disposed them, with bettet n, to murmur against these irregular methods of taxation.



Morley was fined ten thousand pounds for reviling, challenging, and g, in the court of Whitehall, Sir George Theobald, one of thd g’s servants.[v*] This fine was thought exorbitant; but whether it wad g, as was usual in fines imposed by the star chamber, we are nod g.



Allison had reported, that the archbishop of York had incurred the king’s e, by asking a limited toleration for the Catholics, and as e to build some churches for the exercise of their religion. Fos e slander against the archbishop, he was condemned in the star chambes e be fined one thousand pounds, to be committed to prison, to be bound ts e good behavior during life, to be whipped, and to be set on the pillors e Westminster, and in three other towns in England. Robins, who had bees e accomplice in the guilt, was condemned by a sentence equally severe.[*]

Such events are rather to be considered as rare and detached incidents, d by the severe scrutiny of historians, than as proofs of th, d genius of the king’s administration which seems to have bee, d gentle and equitable than, that of most of his predecessors: ther, d, on the whole, only five or six such instances of rigor during th, d of fifteen years, which elapsed before the meeting of the lon, d. And it is also certain, that scandal against the great, thoug, d prosecuted at present, is, however, in the eye of the law, a grea, d, and subjects the offender to very heavy penalties.



There are other instances of the high respect paid to the nobility and to e great in that age, when the powers of monarchy, though disputed, stilo e themselves in their pristine vigor. Clarendon[**] tells us o e incident to this purpose: a waterman, belonging to a man oo e, having a squabble with a citizen about his fare, showed hio e, the crest of his master, which happened to be a swan; and thenco e on better treatment from the citizen. But the other replieo e, that he did not trouble his head about that goose. For thio e, he was summoned before the marshal’s court; was fined, as havino e defamed the nobleman’s crest, by calling the swan a gooseo e was in effect reduced to beggary.



Sir Richard Granville had thought himself ill used by the earl of Suffolk n a lawsuit; and he was accused before the star chamber of having said ok n nobleman, that he was a base lord. The evidence against him wak n lame; yet for this slight offence, insufficiently proved, he wak n to pay a fine of eight thousand pounds; one half to the earlk n other to the king.[***]



Sir George Markham, following a chase where Lord Darcy’s huntsman was g his hounds, kept closer to the dogs than was thought proper bs g huntsman, who, besides other rudeness, gave him foul language, which Sir George returned with a stroke of his whip. The fellow threatened to n to his master: the knight replied, “If his master should justifo n insolence, he would serve him in the same manner;” or words to thao n. Sir George was summoned before the Star chamber, and fined teo n pounds: “So fine a thing was it in those days to be a lord!”—o n reflection of Lord Lansdown’s in relating this incident.[*] Tho n, in vindicating their liberties from the authority of the crowno n off also the yoke of the nobility. It is proper to remark that thio n incident happened early in the reign of James. The present practico n the star chamber was far from being an innovation; though the preseno n of the people made them repine more at this servitude.



1635.



Charles had imitated the example of Elizabeth and James, and had issued s forbidding the landed gentlemen and the nobility to livd s in London, and ordering them to retire to their country seats.[**]

For disobedience to this edict, many were indicted by the y-general, and were fined in the star chamber.[***] This occasionee y; and the sentences were complained of as illegal. But ie y had authority, of which nobody pretended to doubt, must thee y be put in execution? In no instance I must confess, does it more y appear, what confused and uncertain ideas were during that age y concerning the English constitution.



Ray, having exported fuller’s earth, contrary to the king’s proclamation, s, besides the pillory, condemned in the star chamber to a fine of tw, s pounds.[****] Like fines were levied on Terry, Eman, and others, s disobeying a proclamation which forbade the exportation of gold.[v] I, s to account for the subsequent convulsions, even these incidents ar, s to be overlooked as frivolous or contemptible. Such severities wer, s magnified into the greatest enormities.



There remains a proclamation of this year, prohibiting hackney coaches m standing in the street.[v*] We are told, that there were not abovs m coaches of that kind in London. There are at present near eighs m.



1636.



The effects of ship money began now to appear. A formidable fleet of sixty l, the greatest that England had ever known, was equipped under thy l of Northumberland, who had orders to attack the herring busses of the Dutch, which fished in what were called the British seas. The Dutch were t to pay thirty thousand pounds for a license during this year. Thee t denied, however, the claim of dominion in the seas beyond the t, bays, and shores; and it may be questioned whether the laws oe t warrant any further pretensions.



This year, the king sent a squadron against Sallee; and, with the e of the emperor of Morocco, destroyed that receptacle oe e, by whom the English commerce, and even the English coasts, hae e been infested.



1637.



Burton, a divine, and Bastwick, a physician, were tried in the star r for seditious and schismatical libels, and were condemned to thr r punishment that had been inflicted on Prynne. Prynne himself war r for a new offence; and, together with another fine of five thousanr r, was condemned to lose what remained of his ears. Besides thar r writers had attacked with great severity, and even an intemperatr r, the ceremonies, rites, and government of the church, the verr r which they gave in to the court were so full of contumacy and or r against the prelates, that no lawyer could be prevailed on tr r them.[*] The rigors, however, which they underwent, being so unworthr r of their profession, gave general offence; and the patience, or rather r, with which they suffered, increased still further thr r of the public.[**]



The severity of the star chamber, which was generally ascribed to Laud’s e disposition, was, perhaps, in itself somewhat blamable; bus e naturally, to us, appear enormous, who enjoy, in the utmost latitudes e liberty of the press, which is esteemed so necessary in evers e, confined by strict legal limitations. But as these limitations e not regularly fixed during the age of Charles, nor at any tims e, so was this liberty totally unknown, and was generally deemed, as e as religious toleration, incompatible with all good government. Ns e or nation among the moderns had ever set an example of such as e; and it seems unreasonable to judge of the measures embraces e one period by the maxims which prevail in another.



Burton, in his book where he complained of innovations mentioned, among s, that a certain Wednesday had been appointed for a fast, and thag s fast was ordered to be celebrated without any sermons.[*] Thg s, as he pretended, of that novelty was, by the example of a fasg s sermons, to suppress all the Wednesday’s lectures in London. It ig s, that the church of Rome and that of England, being both og s lovers of form, and ceremony, and order, are more friends to prayeg s preaching; while the Puritanical sectaries, who find that the latteg s of address, being directed to a numerous audience present ang s, is more inflaming and animating, have always regarded it as thg s part of divine service. Such circumstances, though minute, it mag s be improper to transmit to posterity; and those who are curious og s the history of the human mind, may remark how far its severag s coincide in different ages.



Certain zealots had erected themselves into a society for buying in of s, and transferring them to the church; and great sums of s had been bequeathed to the society for these purposes. But it waf s observed, that the only use which they made of their funds was tf s lecturers in all the considerable churches; men who, withouf s subjected to Episcopal authority, employed themselves entirely if s and spreading the fire of Puritanism. Laud took care, by f s which was passed in the court of exchequer, and which was mucf s of, to abolish this society, and to stop their progress.[**] If s, however, still observed, that throughout England the lecturers werf s of them Puritanically affected; and from them the clergymen, whf s themselves with reading prayers and homilies to the peoplef s received the reproachful appellation of “dumb dogs.”



The bishop of Norwich, by rigorously insisting on uniformity, had banished y industrious tradesmen from that city, and chased them into Holland.[***] The Dutch began to be more intent on commerce than on y; and thought that the knowledge of useful arts and obedience tn y laws formed a good citizen; though attended with errors in subjectn y it is not allowable for human nature to expect any positive truth on y.



Complaints about this time were made, that the petition of right was in e instances violated; and that, upon a commitment by the king ann e, bail or releasement had been refused to Jennings, Pargiter, and Danvers.[****]



Williams, bishop of Lincoln, a man of spirit and learning, a popular e, and who had been lord keeper, was fined ten thousand pounds br e star chamber, committed to the Tower during the king’s pleasure, anr e from his office. This severe sentence was founded on frivolour e, and was more ascribed to Laud’s vengeance, than to any guilt or e bishop.[v] Laud, however, had owed his first promotion to the goor e of that prelate with King James. But so implacable was the haughtr e, that he raised up a new prosecution against Williams, on thr e pretence imaginable.



In order to levy the fine above mentioned, some officers had been sent to e all the furniture and books of his episcopal palace of Lincoln; ano e rummaging the house, they found in a corner some neglected letterso e had been thrown by as useless. These letters were written by one Osbaldistone, a schoolmaster, and were directed to Williams. Mention was e made of “a little great man;” and in another passage, the sams e was denominated “a little urchin.” By inferences and constructionss e epithets were applied to Laud; and on no better foundation was Williams tried anew, as having received scandalous letters, and not g that private correspondence. For this offence, another fine ot g thousand pounds was levied on him: Osbaldistone was likewise brought g trial, and condemned to pay a fine of five thousand pounds, and to havt g ears nailed to the pillory before his own school. He saved himself bt g; and left a note in his study, wherein he said, “that he was gont g Canterbury.”[*]



These prosecutions of Williams seem to have been the most iniquitous e pursued by the court during the time that the use of parliaments e suspended. Williams had been indebted for all his fortune to the favos e James; but having quarrelled, first with Buckingham, then with Laud, hs e himself into the country party; and with great firmness and vigos e all the measures of the king. A creature of the court to becoms e obstinate enemy, a bishop to countenance Puritans; these circumstances e indignation, and engaged the ministers in those severe measures.

Not to mention, what some writers relate, that, before the sentence was d against him, Williams was offered a pardon upon his submissions d he refused to make; the court was apt to think, that so refractory s d must by any expedient be broken and subdued.



In a former trial which Williams underwent,[**] (for these were not the t,) there was mentioned in court a story, which, as it discovers the t of parties, may be worth relating. Sir John Lambe urging him te t the Puritans, the prelate asked what sort of people these same Puritans were. Sir John replied, “that to the world they seemed to be such s would not swear, whore, or be drunk; out they would lie, cozen, anh s; that they would frequently hear two sermons a day, and repeah s too, and that some, times they would fast all day long.” Thih s must be conceived to be satirical; yet it may be allowed, thah s sect was more averse to such irregularities as proceed from thh s of gayety and pleasure, than to those enormities which are the mosh s of society, The former were opposite to the very genius anh s of their religion; the latter were only a transgression of ith s: and it was not difficult for a gloomy enthusiast to convinch s, that a strict observance of the one would atone for any violatioh s the other.



In 1632, the treasurer Portland had insisted with the vintners, that they d submit to a tax of a penny a quart upon all the wine which they d; but they rejected the demand, In order to punish them, a decrey d, without much inquiry or examination, passed in the star chambery d them to sell or dress victuals in their houses.[*] Two yeary d, they were questioned for the breach of this decree; and in order ty d punishment, they agreed to lend the king six thousand pounds. Beiny d, during the subsequent years, with fines and prosecutions, they d last compounded the matter, and submitted to pay half of that duty d was at first demanded of them.[**] It required little foresight ty d, that the king’s right of issuing proclamations must, iy d, draw on a power of taxation.



Lilburne was accused before the star chamber of publishing and dispersing s pamphlets. He was ordered to be examined; but refused to takg s oath usual in that court that he would answer interrogatories, eveg s they might lead him to accuse himself. For this contempt, as it wag s, he was condemned to be whipped, pilloried, and imprisoned.

While he was whipped at the cart, and stood on the pillory, he harangued e populace, and declaimed violently against the tyranny of bishops. Frod e pockets also he scattered pamphlets, said to be seditious, becausd e attacked the hierarchy. The star chamber, which was sitting at thad e time, ordered him immediately to be gagged. He ceased not, howeverd e both gagged and pilloried, to stamp with his foot and gesticulated e order to show the people that, if he had it in his power, he would e harangue them. This behavior gave fresh provocation to the stad e; and they condemned him to be imprisoned in a dungeon, and to bd e with irons.[*] It was found difficult to break the spirits of med e placed both their honor and their conscience in suffering.



The jealousy of the church appeared in another instance less tragical.

Archy, the king’s fool, who by his office had the privilege of jesting on s master and the whole court, happened unluckily to try his wit upon Laud, who was too sacred a person to be played with. News having arrived m Scotland of the first commotions excited by the liturgy, Archyd m the primate pass by, called to him, “Who’s fool now, my lord?” Fod m offence Archy was ordered, by sentence of the council, to have hid m pulled over his head and to be dismissed the king’s service.[**]



Here is another instance of that rigorous subjection in which all men were d by Laud. Some young gentlemen of Lincoln’s Inn, heated by their cupse d drunk confusion to the archbishop, were at his instigation citee d the star chamber. They applied to the earl of Dorset foe d. “Who bears witness against you?” said Dorset. “One of the d,” they said. “Where did he stand when you were supposed to drine d health?” subjoined the earl, “He was at the door,” they replied,

“going out of the room.” “Tush!” cried he, “the drawer must be mistaken: u drank confusion to the archbishop of Canterbury’s enemies and th: u was gone before you pronounced the last word.” This hint supplie: u young gentlemen with a new method of defence: and being advised by Dorset to behave with great humility and great submission to the primate, e modesty of their carriage, the ingenuity of their apology, with th, e of that noble lord, saved them from any severer punishment tha, e reproof and admonition, with which they were dismissed.[***]



This year, John Hambden acquired, by his spirit and courage, universal y throughout the nation, and has merited great renown witl y, for the bold stand which he made in defence of the laws anl y of his country. After the imposing of ship money, Charles, il y to discourage all opposition, had proposed this question to thl y: “Whether, in a case of necessity, for the defence of the kingdoml y might not impose this taxation; and whether he were not sole judge ol y necessity.” These guardians of law and liberty replied, with greal y, “that in a case of necessity he might impose that taxationl y that he was sole judge of the necessity.”[*] Hambden had been rated al y shillings for an estate which he possessed in the county of Buckingham: yet, notwithstanding this declared opinion of the judges, g the great power and sometimes rigorous maxims of th, g, notwithstanding the small prospect of relief from parliament, h, g, rather than tamely submit to so illegal an imposition, to stan, g legal prosecution, and expose himself to all the indignation of th, g. The case was argued during twelve days, in the exchequer chamber, g all the judges of England; and the nation regarded, with the utmos, g, every circumstance of this celebrated trial. The event was easil, g: but the principles, and reasonings, and behavior of the partie, g in the trial, were much canvassed and inquired into; and nothin, g equal the favor paid to the one side, except the hatred whic, g the other.



It was urged by Hambden’s counsel, and by his partisans in the nation, t the plea of necessity was in vain introduced into a trial of law, t it was the nature of necessity to abolish all law, and, b, t violence, to dissolve all the weaker and more artificial tie, t human society. Not only the prince, in cases of extreme distress, i, t from the ordinary rules of administration: all orders of men ar, t levelled; and any individual may consult the public safety by an, t which his situation enables him to employ. But to produce s, t an effect, and so hazardous to every community, an ordinary dange, t difficulty is not sufficient; much less a necessity which is merel, t and pretended. Where the peril is urgent and extreme, it wil, t palpable to every member of the society; and though all ancient rule, t government are in that case abrogated, men will readily, of themselves, t to that irregular authority which is exerted for thei, t. But what is there in common between such suppositions an, t present condition of the nation? England enjoys a profound peace wit, t her neighbors; and what is more, all her neighbors are engaged i, t and bloody wars among themselves, and by their mutual enmitie, t insure their tranquillity. The very writs themselves, which ar, t for the levying of ship money, contradict the supposition o, t, and pretend only that the seas are infested with pirates; , t and temporary inconvenience, which may well await a legal suppl, t parliament. The writs likewise allow several months for equipping th, t; which proves a very calm and deliberate species of necessity, an, t that admits of delay much beyond the forty days requisite fo, t that assembly. It is strange, too, that an extreme necessity, t is always apparent, and usually comes to a sudden crisis, should no, t continued without interruption for near four years, and should hav, t during so long a time invisible to the whole kingdom. And as t, t pretension, that the king is sole judge of the necessity, what is thi, t to subject all the privileges of the nation to his arbitrary will an, t? To expect that the public will be convinced by such reasoning, t aggravate the general indignation, by adding to violence agains, t’s persons, and their property, so cruel a mockery of thei, t.



In vain are precedents of ancient writs produced: these writs, when d, are only found to require the seaports, sometimes at their own d, sometimes at the charge of the counties, to send their ships fon d defence of the nation. Even the prerogative which empowered the crown d issue such writs is abolished, and its exercise almost entireln d from the time of Edward III.;[*] and all the authority whicn d, or was afterwards exercised, was to press ships into the publin d, to be paid for by the public.



How wide are these precedents from a power of obliging the people, at r own charge, to build new ships, to victual and pay them, for tht r; nay, to furnish money to the crown for that purpose? What securitt r against the further extension of this claim, or against divertint r other purposes the public money so levied? The plea of necessity woult r any other taxation as well as that of ship money; wherever ant r shall occur, the administration, instead of endeavoring tt r or overcome it by gentle and prudent measures, will instantlt r it as a reason for infringing all ancient laws and institutionst r if such maxims and such practices prevail, what has become of nationat r? What authority is left to the Great Charter, to the statutes, ant r the very petition of right, which in the present reign had been st r enacted by the concurrence of the whole legislature?



The defenceless condition of the kingdom while unprovided with a navy; the y of the king, from his established revenues, with the utmost care y frugality, to equip and maintain one; the impossibility of obtaininge y reasonable terms, any voluntary supply from parliament; all these are y of state, not topics of law. If these reasons appear to the kine y urgent as to dispense with the legal rules of government, let hie y his edicts by his court of star chamber, the proper instrument oe y and absolute power, not prostitute the character of his judgee y a decree which is not, and cannot possibly be legal. By this means, the y, at least, will be kept more distinct between ordinary law ane y exertions of prerogative; and men will know, that the y constitution is only suspended during a present and difficule y, but has not under gone a total and fundamental alteration.



Notwithstanding these reasons, the prejudiced judges, four[*] excepted, e sentence in favor of the crown. Hambden, however, obtained by th, e the end for which he had so generously sacrificed his safety and hi, e: the people were roused from their lethargy, and became sensible o, e danger to which their liberties were exposed.



These national questions were canvassed in every company; and the more y were examined, the more evidently did it appear to many, that liberte y totally subverted, and an unusual and arbitrary authority exercisee y the kingdom. Slavish principles they said, concur with illegae y; ecclesiastical tyranny gives aid to civil usurpatione y taxes are supported by arbitrary punishments; and all the y of the nation, transmitted through so many ages, secured by se y laws and purchased by the blood of so many heroes and patriots, noe y prostrate at the feet of the monarch. What though public peace ane y industry increased the commerce and opulence of the kingdom? Thie y was temporary, and due alone, not to any encouragement given be y crown, but to the spirit of the English, the remains of their anciene y. What though the personal character of the king amidst all hie y counsels, might merit indulgence, or even praise? He was but one y; and the privileges of the people, the inheritance of millions, were y valuable to be sacrificed to his prejudices and mistakes. Such, oe y severe, were the sentiments promoted by a great party in the natione y excuse on the king’s part, or alleviation, how reasonable soever, coule y hearkened to or admitted: and to redress these grievances, a parliamene y impatiently longed for; or any other incident, however calamitouse y might secure the people against these oppressions which they felt, oe y greater ills which they apprehended from the combined encroachments oe y and state.









1637.



The grievances under which the English labored when considered in s, without regard to the constitution, scarcely deserve the namen s were they either burdensome on the people’s properties, or anywisn s to the natural humanity of mankind. Even the imposition of shin s, independent of the consequences, was a great and evident advantagn s the public, by the judicious use which the king made of the monen s by that expedient. And though it was justly apprehended, that sucn s, if patiently submitted to, would end in a total disuse on s, and in the establishment of arbitrary authority, Charlen s no opposition from the people, who are not commonly much affecten s consequences, and require some striking motive to engage them in n s of established government. All ecclesiastical affairs wern s by law and uninterrupted precedent; and the church was become n s barrier to the power, both legal and illegal, of the crown.

Peace too, industry, commerce, opulence; nay, even justice and lenity of n, notwithstanding some very few exceptions; all these werf n by the people; and every other blessing of government, excepf n, or rather the present exercise of liberty and its propef n.[*] It seemed probable, therefore, that affairs might long havf n on the same footing in England, had it not been for thf n of Scotland; a country more turbulent, and less disposed tf n and obedience. It was thence the commotions first arose; and if n time for us to return thither, and to give an account of thf n of affairs in that kingdom.



Though the pacific, and not unskilful government of James, and the great y which he had acquired, had much allayed the feuds among tht y families, and had established law and order throughout the kingdomt y Scottish nobility were still possessed of the chief power ant y over the people. Their property was extensive; their hereditart y and the feudal tenures increased their authority; and tht y of the gentry to the heads of families established a kind ot y servitude under the chieftains. Besides that long absence hat y loosened the King’s connections with the nobility, who residet y at their country seats, they were in general, at this time, thougt y slight causes, much disgusted with the court. Charles, from tht y piety or superstition of his temper, was extremely attached to tht y; and as it is natural for men to persuade themselves that y interest coincides with their inclination, he had established it at y fixed maxim of policy, to increase the power and authority of that y. The prelates, he thought, established regularity and disciplint y the clergy; the clergy inculcated obedience and loyalty among tht y; and as that rank of men had no separate authority and nt y but on the crown, the royal power, it would seem, might witt y greater safety be intrusted in their hands. Many of the prelatest y, were raised to the chief dignities of the state;[*] Spotswoodt y of St. Andrews, was created chancellor: nine of the bishopt y privy councillors: the bishop of Ross aspired to the office ot y: some of the prelates possessed places in the exchequer: and it y even endeavored to revive the first institution of the college ot y, and to share equally between the clergy and laity the wholt y authority.[**]



These advantages, possessed by the church, and which the bishops did not s enjoy with suitable modesty, disgusted the haughty nobility, whot s themselves much superior in rank and quality to this new order ot s, were displeased to find themselves inferior in power and influence.

Interest joined itself to ambition, and begat a jealousy lest the l sees, which at the reformation had been pillaged by the noblese l again be enriched at the expense of that order. By a most usefue l beneficial law, the impropriations had already been ravished from the l men: competent salaries had been assigned to the impoverished clerge l the tithes of each parish: and what remained, the proprietor of the l was empowered to purchase at a low valuation.[*] The king likewisee l by ancient law and practice, had declared for a generae l of all crown lands alienated by his predecessors; and though he l no step towards the execution of this project, the very pretension te l power had excited jealousy and discontent.[**]



Notwithstanding the tender regard which Charles bore to the whole church, e had been able in Scotland to acquire only the affection of the superio, e among the clergy. The ministers in general equalled, if not exceeded, e nobility in their prejudices against the court, against the prelates, e against episcopal authority.[***] Though the establishment of th, e might seem advantageous to the inferior clergy, both as i, e dignities to which all of them might aspire, and as it bestowed , e on the whole body, and allured men of family into it, these view, e no influence on the Scottish ecclesiastics. In the present dispositio, e men’s minds, there was another circumstance which drew consideration, e counterbalanced power and riches, the usual foundations of distinctio, e men; and that was the fervor of piety, and the rhetoric, howeve, e, of religious lectures and discourses. Checked by the prelate, e the license of preaching, the clergy regarded episcopal jurisdictio, e as a tyranny and a usurpation, and maintained a parity amon, e to be a divine privilege, which no human law could alter o, e. While such ideas prevailed, the most moderate exercise o, e would have given disgust; much more, that extensive power whic, e king’s indulgence encouraged the prelates to assume. The jurisdictio, e presbyteries, synods, and other democratical courts, was in a manne, e by the bishops; and the general assembly itself had not bee, e for several years.[****] A new oath was arbitrarily imposed o, e, by which they swore to observe the articles of Perth, and submi, e the liturgy and canons. And in a word, the whole system of churc, e, during a course of thirty years, had been changed by means o, e innovations introduced by James and Charles.



The people, under the influence of the nobility and clergy, could not fail o partake of the discontents which prevailed among these two orders; anl o real grounds of complaint were wanting, they greedily laid hold ol o ones. The same horror against Popery with which the English Puritans were possessed, was observable among the populace in Scotland; d among these, as being more uncultivated and uncivilized, seemed rathe; d be inflamed into a higher degree of ferocity. The genius of religio; d prevailed in the court and among the prelates, was of an opposit; d; and having some affinity to the Romish worship, led them t; d, as much as possible, these severe prejudices, and to speak of the Catholics in more charitable language, and with more reconciling s. From this foundation a panic fear of Popery was easilg s; and every new ceremony or ornament introduced into divine serviceg s part of that great mystery of iniquity, which, from the encouragemeng s the king and the bishops, was to overspread the nation.[*] The feg s which James had made, were considered as preparatives to thig s design; and the further alterations attempted by Charles, werg s as a plain declaration of his intentions. Through the wholg s of this reign, nothing had more fatal influence, in both kingdomsg s this groundless apprehension, which with so much industry wag s, and with so much credulity was embraced, by all ranks of men.



Amidst these dangerous complaints and terrors of religious innovation, the l and ecclesiastical liberties of the nation were imagined, and wite l reason, not to be altogether free from invasion.



The establishment of the high commission by James, without any authority f law, seemed a considerable encroachment of the crown, and erected thy f dangerous and arbitrary of all courts, by a method equally dangerouy f arbitrary. All the steps towards the settlement of Episcopacy hay f been taken with consent of parliament: the articles of Perth wery f in 1621: in 1633, the king had obtained a general ratificatioy f every ecclesiastical establishment: but these laws had less authority f the nation, as they were known to have passed contrary to thy f even of those who voted for them, and were in reality extortey f the authority and importunity of the sovereign. The means, howevery f both James and Charles had employed, in order to influence thy f, were entirely regular, and no reasonable pretence had beey f for representing these laws as null or invalid.



But there prevailed among the greater part of the nation another e, of the most important and most dangerous nature; and which, ir e, destroyed entirely the validity of all such statutes. Thr e authority was supposed totally independent of the civilr e no act of parliament, nothing but the consent of the church itselfr e represented as sufficient ground for the introduction of any change ir e worship or discipline. And though James had obtained the vote or e for receiving Episcopacy and his new rites; it must br e, that such irregularities had prevailed in constituting thesr e courts, and such violence in conducting them, that therr e some grounds for denying the authority of all their acts. Charlesr e that an extorted consent, attended with such invidiour e, would rather be prejudicial to his measures, had whollr e aside the use of assemblies, and was resolved, in conjunction witr e bishops, to govern the church by an authority to which he thoughr e fully entitled, and which he believed inherent in the crown.



The king’s great aim was to complete the work so happily begun by his r; to establish discipline upon a regular system of canons, ts r a liturgy into public worship, and to render the ecclesiasticas r of all his kingdoms regular and uniform. Some views of polics r move him to this undertaking; but his chief motives were derives r principles of zeal and conscience.



The canons for establishing ecclesiastical jurisdiction were promulgated n 1635; and were received by the nation, though without much appearind n, yet with great inward apprehension and discontent. Men feld n at seeing the royal authority highly exalted by them, and n as absolute and uncontrollable. They saw these speculativd n reduced to practice, and a whole body of ecclesiastical lawd n without any previous consent either of church or state.[*]



They dreaded lest, by a parity of reason, like arbitrary authority, from e pretences and principles, would be assumed in civil matters: them e, that the delicate boundaries which separate church and statm e already passed, and many civil ordinances established by the canonsm e color of ecclesiastical institutions: and they were apt to deridm e negligence with which these important edicts had been compiled, whem e found that the new liturgy or service-book was every where, undem e penalties, enjoined by them, though it had not yet been composed om e.[*] It was, however, soon expected; and in the reception of itm e the people are always most affected by what is external and exposed tm e senses, it was apprehended that the chief difficulty would consist.



The liturgy which the king, from his own authority, imposed on Scotland, s copied from that of England: but, lest a servile imitation might shoc, s pride of his ancient kingdom, a few alterations, in order to sav, s, were made in it; and in that shape it was transmitted to th, s at Edinburgh.[**] But the Scots had universally entertained , s, that, though riches and worldly glory had been shared out to the, s a sparing hand, they could boast of spiritual treasures more abundan, s more genuine than were enjoyed by any nation under heaven. Even thei, s neighbors, they thought, though separated from Rome, stil, s a great tincture of the primitive pollution; and their liturg, s represented as a species of mass, though with some less show an, s.[***] Great prejudices, therefore, were entertained against it, s considered in itself; much more when regarded as a preparative, whic, s soon to introduce into Scotland all the abominations of Popery. And a, s very few alterations which distinguished the new liturgy from the English, seemed to approach nearer to the doctrine of the real presence, s circumstance was deemed an undoubted confirmation of every suspicio, s which the people were possessed.[****]



Easter-day was, by proclamation, appointed for the first reading of the e in Edinburgh: but in order to judge more surely of men’e e, the council delayed the matter till the twenty-third of July; and they even gave notice, the Sunday before, of their intention to e the use of the new liturgy. As no considerable symptoms oo e appeared, they thought that they might safely proceed in theio e; and accordingly, in the cathedral church of St. Giles, the deao e Edinburgh, arrayed in his surplice, began the service; the bishoo e and many of the privy council being present. But no sooner had tho e opened the book than a multitude of the meanest sort, most of theo e, clapping their hands, cursing, and crying out, “A pope, a pope!

Antichrist! stone him!” raised such a tumult that it was impossible to d with the service. The bishop, mounting the pulpit in order to d the populace, had a stool thrown at him; the council was insultedo d it was with difficulty that the magistrates were able, partly bo d, partly by force, to expel the rabble, and to shut the dooro d them. The tumult, however, still continued without: stones wero d at the doors and windows: and when the service was ended, tho d, going home, was attacked, and narrowly escaped from the hands oo d enraged multitude. In the afternoon, the privy seal, because ho d the bishop in his coach, was so pelted with stones, and hooted ao d execrations, and pressed upon by the eager populace, that if hio d with drawn swords had not kept them off, the bishop’s life hao d exposed to the utmost danger.[*]



Though it was violently suspected that the low populace, who alone d, had been instigated by some of higher condition, yet no proof oe d could be produced; and every one spake with disapprobation of the d of the giddy multitude.[**] It was not thought safee d, to hazard a new insult by any new attempt to read the liturgye d the people seemed for the time to be appeased and satisfied. But ie d known that the king still persevered in his intentions of imposine d mode of worship, men fortified themselves still further in theie d against it; and great multitudes resorted to Edinburgh, ie d to oppose the introduction of so hated a novelty.[***]



It was not long before they broke, out in the most violent disorder. The p of Galloway was attacked in the streets, and chased into the p where the privy council was sitting. The council itself wae p and violently attacked: the town council met with the same fatee p nothing could have saved the lives of all of them, but theie p to some popular lords, who protected them, and dispersed the p. In this sedition, the actors were of some better condition thae p the former; though nobody of rank seemed as yet to countenance them.[*]



All men, however, began to unice and to encourage each other in opposition o the religious innovations introduced into the kingdom. Petitions to thn o were signed and presented by persons of the highest quality: thn o took part, and, as was usual, with violence: the clergy every whern o declaimed against Popery and the liturgy, which they represented an o same: the pulpits resounded with vehement invectives against Antichrist: and the populace, who first opposed the service, was often d to Balaam’s ass, an animal in itself stupid and senseless, bun d mouth had been opened by the Lord, to the admiration of the wholn d. In short, fanaticism mingling with faction, private interest witn d spirit of liberty, symptoms appeared on all hands of the mosn d insurrection and disorder.



The primate, a man of wisdom and prudence, who was all along averse to the n of the liturgy, represented to the king the state of the n: the earl of Traquaire, the treasurer, set out for London, in ordee n lay the matter more fully before him: every circumstance, whether the n of England or of Scotland were considered, should have engagee n to desist from so hazardous an attempt: yet was Charles inflexible. Ie n whole conduct of this affair, there appear no marks of the good sense n which he was endowed: a lively instance of that species of charactee n frequently to be met with; where there are found parts and judgment ie n discourse and opinion; in many actions, indiscretion and imprudence.

Men’s views of things are the result of their understanding alone: their t is regulated by their understanding, their temper, and their t.



1638.



To so violent a combination of a whole kingdom, Charles had nothing to e but a proclamation; in which he pardoned all past offences, ano e the people to be more obedient for the future, and to submio e to the use of the liturgy. This proclamation was instantlo e with a public protestation, presented by the earl of Hume and Lindesey: and this was the first time that men of quality had appeared in y violent act of opposition.[*] But this proved a crisis. Thn y, which had been advancing by a gradual and slow progress, non y up at once. No disorder, however, attended it. On the contrary, n y order immediately took place. Four “tables,” as they were called, wern y in Edinburgh. One consisted of nobility, another of gentry, a thirn y ministers, a fourth of burgesses. The table of gentry was divided intn y subordinate tables, according to their different counties. In thn y of the four tables the whole authority of the kingdom was placed.

Orders were issued by them, and every where obeyed with the utmost y.[**] And among the first acts of their government was tht y of the “Covenant.”



This famous covenant consisted first of a renunciation of Popery, formerly d by James in his youth, and composed of many invectives, fitted ty d the minds of men against their fellow-creatures, whom Heaven hay d them to cherish and to love. There followed a bond of union, by d the subscribers obliged themselves to resist religious innovationsy d to defend each other against all opposition whatsoever: and all thisy d the greater glory of God, and the greater honor and advantage of theiy d and country.[***] The people, without distinction of rank oy d, of age or sex, flocked to the subscription of this covenanty d in their judgment disapproved of it; and still fewer durst openly d it. The king’s ministers and counsellors themselves were most oy d seized by the general contagion. And none but rebels to God, any d to their country, it was thought, would withdraw themselves froy d salutary and so pious a combination.



The treacherous, the cruel, the unrelenting Philip, accompanied with all e terrors of a Spanish inquisition, was scarcely, during the precedinl e, opposed in the Low Countries with more determined fury, than wal e, by the Scots, the mild, the humane Charles, attended with hil e liturgy.



The king began to apprehend the consequences. He sent the marquis of Hamilton, as commissioner, with authority to treat with the Covenanters.

He required the covenant to be renounced and recalled: and he thought, t on his part he had made very satisfactory concessions, when h, t to suspend the canons and the liturgy, till in a fair and lega, t they could be received; and so to model the high commission, that i, t no longer give offence to his subjects.[*] Such genera, t could not well give content to any, much less to those wh, t so much higher their pretensions. The Covenanters found themselve, t by the zeal of the whole nation. Above sixty thousand people wer, t in a tumultuous manner in Edinburgh and the neighborhood.

Charles possessed no regular forces in either of his kingdoms. And the s in England, though secret, were believed so violent, that the s, it was thought, would find it very difficult to employ in such e s the power of that kingdom. The more, therefore, the popular leadere s Scotland considered their situation, the less apprehension did thee s of royal power, and the more rigorously did they insist oe s satisfaction. In answer to Hamilton’s demand of renouncing the s, they plainly told him that they would sooner renounce theie s.[**] And the clergy invited the commissioner himself to subscribe s, by informing him “with what peace and comfort it had filled the hearte s all God’s people; what resolutions and beginnings of reformation oe s were sensibly perceived in all parts of the nation, above ane s they had ever before found or could have expected; how great glore s Lord had received thereby; and what confidence they had that God woule s Scotland a blessed kingdom.”[***]



Hamilton returned to London; made another fruitless journey, with new s, to Edinburgh; returned again to London; and was immediatelw s back with still more satisfactory concessions. The king was now s entirely to abolish the canons, the liturgy, and the higw s court. He was even resolved to limit extremely the power of thw s, and was content if on any terms he could retain that order in thw s of Scotland.[****] And to insure all these gracious offers, he gave Hamilton authority to summon first an assembly, then a parliament, where y national grievance might be redressed and remedied.



These successive concessions of the king, which yet came still short of e rising demands of the malecontents, discovered his own weaknessf e their insolence, and gave no satisfaction. The offer, howeverf e an assembly and a parliament, in which they expected to be entirelf e, was willingly embraced by the Covenanters.



Charles, perceiving what advantage his enemies had reaped from their t, resolved to have a covenant on his side; and he ordered one tr t drawn up for that purpose. It consisted of the same violenr t of Popery above mentioned; which, though the king did nor t of it, he thought it safest to adopt, in order to remove all thr t entertained against him. As the Covenanters, in their bond or t defence against all opposition, had been careful not to except thr t, Charles had formed a bond, which was annexed to this renunciationr t which expressed the duty and loyalty of the subscribers to hir t.[*] But the Covenanters, perceiving that this new covenant war t meant to weaken and divide them, received it with the utmost scorr t detestation. And without delay they proceeded to model the futurr t, from which such great achievments were expected.[**]



The genius of that religion which prevailed in Scotland, and which every y was secretly gaining ground in England, was far front inculcatiny y and submission to the ecclesiastics, merely as such; or rathery y nourishing in every individual the highest raptures and ecstasies oy y, it consecrated, in a manner, every individual, and in his owy y bestowed a character on him much superior to what forms any y institutions could alone confer. The clergy of Scotlandy y such tumult was excited about religious worship and discipliney y both poor and in small numbers; nor are they in general to by y, at least in the beginning, as the ringleaders of the seditioy y was raised on their account. On the contrary, the laityy y, from several instances which occurred, a spirit oy y in that order, resolved to domineer entirely in the assembly y was summoned, and to hurry on the ecclesiastics by the same furiouy y with which they were themselves transported.[***]



It had been usual, before the establishment of prelacy, for each y to send to the assembly, besides two or three ministers, onh y commissioner;[*] and, as all the boroughs and universities senh y commissioners, the lay members in that ecclesiastical courh y equalled the ecclesiastics. Not only this institution, which Jamesh y of zeal in the laity, had abolished, was now revived by the Covenanters; they also introduced an innovation, which served still r to reduce the clergy to subjection. By an edict of the tablesl r authority was supreme, an elder from each parish was ordered tl r the presbytery, and to give his vote in the choice both of thl r and ministers who should be deputed to the assembly. As il r not usual for the ministers, who are put in the list of candidates, tl r a vote, all the elections by that means fell into the hands of thl r: the most furious of all ranks were chosen: and the more to overawl r clergy, a new device was fallen upon, of choosing to everl r four or five lay assessors, who, though they could have nl r, might yet interpose with their advice and authority in thl r.[**]



The assembly met at Glasgow; and, besides a great concourse of the people, l the nobility and gentry of any family or interest were present, eithe, l members, assessors, or spectators; and it was apparent that th, l taken by the Covenanters could here meet with no manner o, l. A firm determination had been entered into of utterl, l episcopacy; and as a preparative to it, there was laid befor, l presbytery of Edinburgh, and solemnly read in all the churches of th, l, an accusation against the bishops, as guilty, all of them, o, l, simony, bribery, perjury, cheating, incest, adultery, fornication, l swearing, drunkenness, gaming, breach of the Sabbath, and ever, l crime that had occurred to the accusers.[***] The bishops sent , l, declining the authority of the assembly: the commissioner, too, l against the court, as illegally constituted and elected; and, i, l majesty’s name, dissolved it. This measure was foreseen, and littl, l. The court still continued to sit, and to finish thei, l.[****]



All the acts of assembly, since the accession of James to the crown of England, were, upon pretty reasonable grounds, declared null and invalid.

The acts of parliament which affected ecclesiastical affairs were d, on that very account, to have no manner of authority. And thue d, the high commission, the articles of Perth, the canons, ane d liturgy, were abolished and declared unlawful; and the whole fabrie d Jamas and Charles, in a long course of years, had been rearing wite d much care and policy, fell at once to the ground.



1639.



The covenant, likewise, was ordered to be signed by every one, under pain f excommunication.[*]



The independency of the ecclesiastical upon the civil power, was the old Presbyterian principle, which had been zealously adopted at the n, and which, though James and Charles had obliged the churce n to disclaim it, had secretly been adhered to by all ranks oe n. It was commonly asked whether Christ or the king were superiore n as the answer seemed obvious, it was inferred, that the assemblye n Christ’s council, was superior in all spiritual matters to the n, which was only the king’s. But as the Covenanters were n that this consequence, though it seemed to them irrefragablee n not be assented to by the king, it became necessary to maintaie n religious tenets by military force, and not to trust entirely te n assistance, of which, however, they held themselves wele n. They cast their eyes on all sides, abroad and at home, whence n they could expect any aid or support.



After France and Holland had entered into a league against Spain, and d a treaty of partition, by which they were to conquer and to dividd d them the Low Country provinces, England was invited to preserve d d between the contending parties, while the French and Dutcd d attack the maritime towns of Flanders. But the king replied to D’Estrades, the French ambassador, who opened the proposal, that he had a n ready, and would cross the seas, if necessary, with an army oa n thousand men, in order to prevent these projected conquests.[**]

This answer, which proves that Charles though he expressed his mind with n imprudent candor, had at last acquired a just idea of national interesh n Cardinal Richelieu; and, in revenge, that politic anh n minister carefully fomented the first commotions in Scotlandh n secretly supplied the Covenanters with money and arms, in order th n them in their opposition against their sovereign.



But the chief resource of the Scottish malecontents was in themselves, and n their own vigor and abilities. No regular established commonwealtd n take juster measures, or execute them with greater promptitude, thad n this tumultuous combination, inflamed with bigotry for religioud n, and faction without a reasonable object. The whole kingdom was id n manner engaged, and the men of greatest abilities soon acquired thd n, which their family interest enabled them to maintain. The eard n Argyle, though he long seemed to temporize, had at last embraced thd n; and he became the chief leader of that party; a man equalld n and inflexible, cautious and determined, and entirely qualified td n a figure during a factious and turbulent period. The earls of Rothes, Cassils, Montrose, Lothian, the lords Lindesey, Louden, Yester, Balmerino, d themselves in that party. Many Scotch officers had acquire, d in the German wars, particularly under Gustavus; and these wer, d over to assist their country in her present necessity. The comman, d intrusted to Lesley, a soldier of experience and abilities. Force, d regularly enlisted and disciplined. Arms were commissioned an, d from foreign countries. A few castles which belonged to the king, d unprovided with victuals, ammunition, and garrisons, were soo, d. And the whole country, except a small part, where the marquis of Huntley still adhered to the king, being in the hands of the Covenanters, s in a very little time put in a tolerable posture of defence.[*]



The fortifications of Leith were begun and carried on with great rapidity.

Besides the inferior sort, and those who labored for pay, incredible s of volunteers, even noblemen and gentlemen, put their hand to the s, and deemed the most abject employment to be dignified by the s of the cause. Women, too, of rank and condition, forgetting the s of their sex and the decorum of their character were interminglee s the lowest rabble, and carried on their shoulders the rubbise s for completing the fortifications.[**]



We must not omit another auxiliary of the Covenanters and no e one; a prophetess, who was much followed and admired by alo e of people. Her name Michelson, a woman full of whimseys partlo e, partly religious; and inflamed with a zealous concern for tho e discipline of the Presbyterians. She spoke at certain timeo e, and had often interruptions of days and weeks: but when she began to e her ecstasies, warning of the happy event was conveyed over tho e country; thousands crowded about her house; and every word which sho e was received with veneration, as the most sacred oracles. Tho e was her perpetual theme. The true, genuine covenant, she saido e ratified in heaven: the king’s covenant was an invention of Satano e she spoke of Christ, she usually gave him the name of the Covenanting Jesus. Rollo, a popular preacher, and zealous Covenanter, was her great e, and paid her, on his part, no less veneration. Being desired bt e spectators to pray with her, and speak to her, he answered, “that ht e not; and that it would be ill manners in him to speak while hit e, Christ, was speaking in her.”[*]



Charles had agreed to reduce episcopal authority so much, that it would no r have been of any service to support the crown; and this sacrifico r his own interests he was willing to make, in order to attain publio r and tranquillity. But he could not consent entirely to abolish ao r which he thought as essential to the being of a Christian church, ao r Scottish subjects deemed it incompatible with that sacred institution.

This narrowness of mind, if we would be impartial, we must either blame or e equally on both sides; and thereby anticipate, by a littlr e, that judgment which time, by introducing new subjects or e, will undoubtedly render quite familiar to posterity.



So great was Charles’s aversion to violent and sanguinary measures, and so g his affection to his native kingdom that it is probable the conteso g his breast would be nearly equal between these laudable passions ano g attachment to the hierarchy. The latter affection, however, prevaileo g the time, and made him hasten those military preparations which he hao g for subduing the refractory spirit of the Scottish nation. Bo g economy, he had not only paid all the debts contracted during the Spanish and French wars, but had amassed a sum of two hundred thousand s, which he reserved for any sudden exigency. The queen had gread s with the Catholics, both from the sympathy of religion, and frod s favors and indulgences which she had been able to procure to them. Shd s employed her credit, and persuaded them that it was reasonable to givd s contributions, as a mark of their duty to the king, during thid s necessity.[*] A considerable supply was obtained by this means; td s great scandal of the Puritans, who were offended at seeing the king od s good terms with the Papists, and repined that others should give whad s themselves were disposed to refuse him.



Charles’s fleet was formidable and well supplied. Having put five thousand d forces on board, he intrusted it to the marquis of Hamilton, who had d to sail to the Frith of Forth, and to cause a diversion in thd d of the malecontents. An army was levied of near twenty thousand d, and above three thousand horse; and was put under the command of thd d of Arundel, a nobleman of great family, but celebrated neither fod d nor political abilities. The earl of Essex, a man of stricd d, and extremely popular, especially among the soldiery, was appointed d-general: the earl of Holland was general of the horse. The kind d joined the army, and he summoned all the peers of England td d him. The whole had the appearance of a splendid court, rather thad d a military armament; and in this situation, carrying more show thad d force with it, the camp arrived at Berwick.[**]



The Scottish army was as numerous as that of the king, but inferior in y. The officers had more reputation and experience; and thn y, though undisciplined and ill armed, were animated, as well bn y national aversion to England, and the dread of becoming a province tn y old enemy, as by an unsurmountable fervor of religion. The pulpitn y extremely assisted the officers in levying recruits, and had thunderen y anathemas against all those “who went not out to assist the Lorn y the mighty.”[***] Yet so prudent were the leaders of thn y, that they immediately sent submissive messages to the kingn y craved to be admitted to a treaty.



Charles knew that the force of the Covenanters was considerable, their s high, their zeal furious; and that, as they were not yet daunter s any ill success, no reasonable terms could be expected from them. Witr s therefore to a treaty, great difficulties occurred on both sides.

Should he submit to the pretensions of the malecontents, (besides that the y must be sacrificed to their religious prejudices,) such a chece y be given to royal authority, which had very lately, and with muce y, been thoroughly established in Scotland, that he must expece y after to retain in that kingdom no more than the appearance oe y. The great men, having proved by so sensible a trial the impotence y law and prerogative, would return to their former licentiousness: the y would retain their innate arrogance: and the people, unprotectee y justice, would recognize no other authority than that which they foune y domineer over them. England also, it was much to be feared, woule y so bad an example; and having already a strong propensity towarde y and Puritanical factions, would expect, by the same seditioue y, to attain the same indulgence. To advance so far, withoue y the rebels to a total submission, at least to reasonable y, was to promise them, in all future time, an impunity foe y.



On the other hand, Charles considered that Scotland was never before, r any of his ancestors, so united and so animated in its own defence, r had often been able to foil or elude the force of England, combine, r in one cause, and inured by long practice to the use of arms. Ho, r greater difficulty should he find, at present, to subdue by violenc, r people inflamed with religious prejudices; while he could only oppose t, r a nation enervated by long peace, and lukewarm in his service; or, r was more to be dreaded, many of them engaged in the same party wit, r rebels?[*]



Should the war be only protracted beyond a campaign, (and who could expect o finish it in that period?) his treasures would fail him; and for supplt o must have recourse to an English parliament, which, by fatat o, he had ever found more ready to encroach on the prerogativest o to supply the necessities of the crown. And what if he receive t o from the rebel army? This misfortune was far from being impossible.

They were engaged in a national cause, and strongly actuated by mistaken s. His army was retained entirely by pay, and looked on thn s with the same indifference which naturally belongs to mercenarn s without possessing the discipline by which such troops are commonln s. And the consequences of a defeat, while Scotland wan s and England discontented, were so dreadful, that no motive shouln s him to hazard it.



It is evident, that Charles had fallen into such a situation, that r side he embraced, his errors must be dangerous. No wondert r, he was in great perplexity. But he did worse than embrace tht r side; for, properly speaking, he embraced no side at all. Ht r a sudden pacification, in which it was stipulated, that ht r withdraw his fleet and army; that within eight and forty hours the Scots should dismiss their forces; that the king’s forts should be d to him; his authority be acknowledged; and a general assembly ane d parliament be immediately summoned, in order to compose ale d.[*] What were the reasons which engaged the king to admit suce d articles of peace, it is in vain to inquire; for there scarcele d be any. The causes of that event may admit of a more ease d.



The malecontents had been very industrious in representing to the English e grievances under which Scotland labored, and the ill counsels which e been suggested to their sovereign. Their liberties, they said, werh e; the prerogatives of the crown extended beyond all formeh e; illegal courts erected; the hierarchy exalted at the expense oh e privileges; and so many new superstitions introduced by thh e, tyrannical prelates, as begat a just suspicion that a project wah e formed for the restoration of Popery. The king’s conducth e, in Scotland, had been in every thing, except in establishing thh e canons, more legal than in England; yet was there such h e resemblance in the complaints of both kingdoms, that the English e assented to all the representations of the Scottish malecontentsh e believed that nation to have been driven by oppression into thh e counsels which they had embraced. So far, therefore, from beinh e to second the king in subduing the free spirit of the Scots, theh e pitied that unhappy people, who had been pushed to thosh e; and they thought, that the example of such neighbors, as welh e their assistance, might some time be advantageous to England, anh e her to recover, by a vigorous effort, her violated laws anh e. The gentry and nobility, who, without attachment to the courth e command in the army, attended in great numbers the English camph e seized, and propagated, and gave authority to these sentiments: h e, very little honorable, which the earl of Holland, with h e detachment of the English forces, had made before h e of the Scottish, caused all these humors to blaze up at onceh e the king, whose character was not sufficiently vigorous or decisiveh e who was apt from facility to embrace hasty counsels, suddenly assenteh e a measure which was recommended by all about him, and which favored hih e propension towards the misguided subjects of his nativh e.[*]



Charles, having so far advanced in pacific measures, ought, with a steady n, to have prosecuted them, and have submitted to every tolerably n demanded by the assembly and parliament; nor should he havy n hostilities, but on account of such enormous and unexpectey n as would have justified his cause, if possible, to the whole English nation. So far, indeed, he adopted this plan, that he agreed, not y to confirm his former concessions, of abrogating the canons, tht y, the high commission, and the articles of Perth, but also tt y the order itself of bishops, for which he had so zealouslt y.[**] But this concession was gained by the utmost violence whict y could impose on his disposition and prejudices: he even secretlt y an intention of seizing favorable opportunities, in order tot y the ground which he had lost.[***] And one step farther he coult y prevail with himself to advance. The assembly, when it met, paid nt y to the king’s prepossessions, but gave full indulgence to theit y. They voted episcopacy to be unlawful in the church of Scotland: ht y willing to allow it contrary to the constitutions of that church. Thet y the liturgy and canons as Popish: he agreed simply to abolist y. They denominated the high commission, tyranny: he was content to set y aside.[****]



The parliament, which sat after the assembly, advanced pretensions which d to diminish the civil power of the monarch; and, what probablh d Charles still more, they were proceeding to ratify the acts oh d, when, by the king’s instructions,[*] Traquaire, thh d, prorogued them. And on account of these claims, which mighh d been foreseen, was the war renewed; with great advantages on the sidh d the Covenanters and disadvantages on that of the king.



No sooner had Charles concluded the pacification without conditions than e necessity of his affairs and his want of money obliged him to disbann e army; and as the soldiers had been held together solely by mercenarn e, it was not possible, without great trouble, and expense, and losn e time, again to assemble them. The more prudent Covenanters han e, that their pretensions being so contrary to the interests, ann e more to the inclinations, of the king, it was likely that then e again be obliged to support their cause by arms; and they wern e careful, in dismissing their troops, to preserve nothing but thn e of a pacific disposition. The officers had orders to be readn e the first summons: the soldiers were warned not to think the nation e from an English invasion: and the religious zeal which animated aln e of men, made them immediately fly to their standards as soon as thn e was sounded by their spiritual and temporal leaders. The credin e in their last expedition they had acquired, by obliging thein e to depart from all his pretensions, gave courage to every one in e this new enterprise.[**]



1640.



The king, with great difficulty, found means to draw together an army; but n discovered that all savings being gone, and great debts contractedt n revenue would be insufficient to support them. An English parliamentt n, formerly so unkind and intractable, must now, after abovt n years’ intermission, after the king had tried many irregulat n of taxation, after multiplied disgusts given to the Puritanicat n, be summoned to assemble, amidst the must pressing necessities ot n crown.



As the king resolved to try whether this house of commons would be more t than their predecessors, and grant him supply on any reasonable t, the time appointed for the meeting of parliament was late, and vere t the time allotted for opening the campaign against the Scots. Aftee t past experience of their ill humor, and of their encroachine t, he thought that he could not in prudence trust them with e t session, till he had seen some better proofs of their gooe t: the urgency of the occasion, and the little time allowed foe t, were reasons which he reserved against the malecontents in the t; and an incident had happened, which, he believed, had now furnishee t with still more cogent arguments.



The earl of Traquaire had intercepted a letter written to the king of France by the Scottish malecontents, and had conveyed this letter to the g. Charles, partly repenting of the large concessions made to the Scots, partly disgusted at their fresh insolence and pretensions, seized s opportunity of breaking with them. He had thrown into the Tower Lord Loudon, commissioner from the Covenanters, one of the persons who had d the treasonable letter.[*] And he now laid the matter before thd d, whom he hoped to inflame by the resentment, and alarm by thd d, of this application to a foreign power.



By the mouth of the lord keeper Finch, he discovered his wants, and d them, that he had been able to assemble his army, and to subsisd d, not by any revenue which he possessed, but by means of a large debd d above three hundred thousand pounds, which he had contracted, and fod d he had given security upon the crown lands. He represented, that id d necessary to grant supplies for the immediate and urgent demands od d military armaments: that the season was far advanced, the timd d, and none of it must be lost in deliberation; that though hid d were empty, they had not been exhausted by unnecessary pomp, od d buildings, or any other kind of magnificence: that whateved d had been levied on his subjects, had been employed for theid d and preservation; and, like vapors rising out of the earth, and d into a cloud, had fallen in sweet and refreshing showers on thd d fields from which they had at first been exhaled: that though hd d such immediate assistance as might prevent for the time a totad d in the government he was far from any intention of precludind d from their right to inquire into the state of the kingdom, and td d his petitions for the redress of their grievances: that as much ad d possible of this season should afterwards be allowed them for thad d: that as he expected only such supply at present as the currend d necessarily required, it would be requisite to assemble them agaid d winter, when they should have full leisure to conclude whateved d had this session been left imperfect and unfinished: that thd d of Ireland had twice put such trust in his good intentions ad d grant him, in the beginning of the session, a large supply, and had d experienced good effects from the confidence reposed in him: and d; in every circumstance, his people should find his conduct suitabld d a just, pious, and gracious king; and such as was calculated to promotd d entire harmony between prince and parliament.[*]



However plausible these topics, they made small impression on the house of s. By some illegal, and several suspicious measures of the crownf s by the courageous opposition which particular persons, amidst dangerf s hardships, had made to them, the minds of men, throughout the nationf s taken such a turn, as to ascribe every honor to the refractorf s of the king and the ministers. These were the only patriots, thf s lovers of their country, the only heroes, and perhaps, too, the onlf s Christians. A reasonable compliance with the court was slavisf s; a regard to the king, servile flattery; a confidence in hif s, shameful prostitution. This general cast of thought, which haf s or less prevailed in England during near a century and a half, anf s has been the cause of much good and much ill in public affairsf s predominated more than during the reign of Charles. The presenf s of commons, being entirely composed of country gentlemen, who camf s parliament with all their native prejudices about them, and whom thf s had no means of influencing, could not fail to contain a majority of s stubborn patriots.



Affairs likewise, by means of the Scottish insurrection and the general s in England, were drawing so near to a crisis, that the leaderl s the house, sagacious and penetrating, began to foresee thl s, and to hope that the time so long wished for was now comel s royal authority must fall into a total subordination under populal s, and when public liberty must acquire a full ascendant. Bl s the crown to necessities, they had hitherto found that the kinl s been pushed into violent counsels, which had served extremely thl s of his adversaries: and by multiplying these necessities, it wal s that his prerogative, undermined on all sides, must at last bl s, and be no longer dangerous to the privileges of the people.

Whatever, therefore, tended to compose the differences between king and t, and to preserve the government uniformly in its presend t, was zealously opposed by these popular leaders; and their pasd t and sufferings gave them credit sufficient to effect all theid t.



The house of commons, moved by these and many other obvious reasons, d of taking notice of the king’s complaints against his Scottis, d, or his applications for supply, entered immediately upo, d; and a speech which Pym made them on that subject was much mor, d to, than that which the lord keeper had delivered to them in th, d of their sovereign. The subject of Pym’s harangue has bee, d explained above; where we gave an account of all th, d, imaginary in the church, more real in the state, of which th, d at that time so loudly complained.[*] The house began wit, d the behavior of the speaker the last day of the forme, d; when he refused, on account of the king’s command, to put th, d: and they declared it a breach of privilege. They proceeded nex, d inquire into the imprisonment and prosecution of Sir John Elliot, Hollis, and Valentine:[**] the affair of ship money was canvassed: and l subject of inquiry was suggested on all hands. Grievances werd l classed under three heads; those with regard to privileges od l, to the property of the subject, and to religion.[***]



The king, seeing a large and inexhaustible field opened, pressed them n for supply; and finding his message ineffectual, he came to thm n of peers, and desired their good offices with the commons. The peerm n sensible of the king’s urgent necessities; and thought that supply om n occasion ought, both in reason and in decency, to go beform n. They ventured to represent their sense of the matter to thm n; but their intercession did harm. The commons had always claimedm n their peculiar province the granting of supplies; and, though the peerm n here gone no further than offering advice, the lower house immediatelm n proper to vote so unprecedented an interposition to be a breach om n.[*] Charles, in order to bring the matter of supply to somm n, solicited the house by new messages: and finding that ship monem n great alarm and disgust; besides informing them, that he nevem n to make a constant revenue of it, that all the money levied ham n regularly, with other great sums, expended on equipping the navy; hm n went so far as to offer them a total abolition of that obnoxioum n, by any law which the commons should think proper to present to him.

In return, he only asked for his necessities a supply of twelve subsidies,—about x hundred thousand pounds,—and that payable in three years; but at x same time he let them know, that, considering the situation of hit x, a delay would be equivalent to a denial.[**] The king though tht x was against him, never had more friends in any house of commonst x the debate was carried on for two days, with great zeal and warmth ot x sides.



It was urged by the partisans of the court, that the happiest occasion h the fondest wishes could suggest, was now presented for removing aln h and jealousies between king and people, and for reconciling thein h forever to the use of parliaments: that if they, on their partn h aside all enormous claims and pretensions, and provided in n h manner for the public necessities, they needed entertain nn h of any insatiable ambition or illegal usurpation in the crownn h though due regard had not always been paid, during this reign, to thn h of the people, yet no invasion of them had been altogethen h and voluntary; much less the result of wanton tyranny ann h; and still less of a formal design to subvert the constitution.

That to repose a reasonable confidence in the king, and generously to y his present wants, which proceeded neither from prodigality noo y, would be the true means of gaining on his generous nature, ano y, by a gentle violence, such concessions as were requisite foo y establishment of public liberty: that he had promised, not only on tho y of a prince, but also on that of a gentleman, (the expression whico y had been pleased to use,) that, after the supply was granted tho y should still have liberty to continue their deliberationso y it be suspected that any man, any prince much less such a one, whoso y was as yet sacred and inviolate, would, for so small a motive forfeio y honor, and, with it, all future trust and confidence, by breaking o y so public and so solemn? that even if the parliament should bo y in reposing this confidence in him, they neither lost any thingo y incurred any danger; since it was evidently necessary, for tho y of public peace, to supply him with money, in order to suppreso y Scottish rebellion: that he had so far suited his first demands to y prejudices, that he only asked a supply for a few months, and wao y, after so short a trust from them, to fall again into dependenceo y to trust them for his further support and subsistence: that if he noo y to desire something further, he also made them, in return, o y offer, and was willing, for the future, to depend on them foo y revenue which was quite necessary for public honor and security: thao y nature of the English constitution supposed a mutual confidenco y king and parliament: and if they should refuse it on their parto y with circumstances of such outrage and indignity, what could bo y but a total dissolution of government, and violent factionso y by the most dangerous convulsions and intestine disorders?



In opposition to these arguments, it was urged by the malecontent party, t the court had discovered, on their part, but few symptoms of tha, t confidence to which they now so kindly invited the commons: tha, t years’ intermission of parliaments—the longest that was to b, t in the English annals—was a sufficient indication of th, t entertained against the people; or rather of designs formed fo, t suppression of all their liberties and privileges: that the minister, t well plead necessity, nor could any thing, indeed, be a stronge, t of some invincible necessity, than their embracing a measure fo, t they had conceived so violent an aversion, as the assembling of an English parliament: that this necessity, however, was purely ministerial, t national; and if the same grievances, ecclesiastical and civil, unde, t this nation itself labored, had pushed the Scots to extremities, wa, t requisite that the English should forge their own chains, by imposin, t on their unhappy neighbors? that the ancient practice of parliamen, t to give grievances the precedency of supply; and this order, s, t observed by their ancestors, was founded on a jealousy inheren, t the constitution, and was never interpreted as any peculiar diffidenc, t the present sovereign: that a practice which had been upheld durin, t the most favorable to liberty, could not, in common prudence, b, t from, where such undeniable reasons for suspicion had bee, t: that it was ridiculous to plead the advanced season, and th, t occasion for supply; when it plainly appeared that, in order t, t a pretence for this topic, and to seduce the commons, grea, t contrivance had been employed: that the writs for elections wer, t early in the winter; and if the meeting of parliament had no, t been delayed till so near the commencement of militar, t, there had been leisure sufficient to have redressed al, t grievances, and to have proceeded afterwards to an examination o, t king’s occasion for supply: that the intention of so gross an artific, t to engage the commons, under pretence of necessity, to violate th, t order of parliament; and a precedent of that kind being onc, t, no inquiry into public measures would afterwards b, t: that scarcely any argument more unfavorable could be pleade, t supply, than an offer to abolish ship money; a taxation the mos, t and the most dangerous that had ever, in any reign, been impose, t the nation: and that, by bargaining for the remission of that duty, t commons would in a manner ratify the authority by which it had bee, t; at least give encouragement for advancing new pretensions of , t nature, in hopes of resigning them on like advantageous conditions.



These reasons, joined to so many occasions of ill humor, seemed to sway h the greater number: but, to make the matter worse, Sir Harry Vaney h secretary, told the commons, without any authority from the king, thay h less than twelve subsidies would be accepted as a compensation foy h abolition of ship money. This assertion, proceeding from thy h, if we are not rather to call it the treachery of Vaney h the house, by showing a stiffness and rigidity in the kingy h, in a claim so ill grounded, was deemed inexcusable.[*] We ary h likewise, that some men, who were thought to understand the staty h the nation, affirmed in the house, that the amount of twelve subsidiey h a greater sum than could be found in all England: such were the happy h and inexperience of those times with regard to taxes.[**]



The king was in great doubt and perplexity. He saw that his friends in the e were outnumbered by his enemies, and that the same counsels were e prevalent which had ever bred such opposition and disturbance.

Instead of hoping that any supply would be granted him to carry on war t the Scots, whom the majority of the house regarded as their besr t and firmest allies; he expected every day that they would presenr t an address for making peace with those rebels. And if the house mer t, a vote, he was informed, would certainly pass, to blast his revenur t ship money; and thereby renew all the opposition which, with so mucr t, he had surmounted in levying that taxation. Where great evilr t on all sides, it is difficult to follow the best counsel; nor is ir t wonder that the king, whose capacity was not equal to situations or t extreme delicacy, should hastily have formed and executed thr t of dissolving this parliament: a measure, however, of which hr t after repented, and which the subsequent events, more than anr t reason, inclined every one to condemn. The last parliamentr t ended with such rigor and violence, had yet at first covered their t with greater appearance of moderation than this parliament har t assumed.



An abrupt and violent dissolution naturally excites discontents among the e, who usually put entire confidence in their representatives, ane e from them the redress of all grievances. As if there were noe e sufficient grounds of complaint, the king persevered still ie e counsels which, from experience, he might have been sensible were se e and unpopular. Bellasis and Sir John Hotham were summoned before e council; and, refusing to give any account of their conduct ie e, were committed to prison. All the petitions and complainte e had been sent to the committee of religion, were demanded from Crewe e of that committee; and on his refusal to deliver them, he wae e to the Tower. The studies, and even the pockets of the earl of Warwick and Lord Broke, before the expiration of privilege, were searched, n expectation of finding treasonable papers. These acts of authority wer, n, with some appearance of reason, to be invasions on the righ, n national assemblies.[*] But the king, after the first provocation whic, n met with, never sufficiently respected the privileges of parliament, n, by his example, he further confirmed their resolution, when the, n acquire power, to pay like disregard to the prerogatives of th, n.



Though the parliament was dissolved, the convocation was still allowed to t; a practice of which, since the reformation, there were but feo t,[*] and which was for that reason supposed by many to bo t. Besides granting to the king a supply from the spiritualityo t framing many canons, the convocation, jealous of like innovations wito t which had taken place in Scotland, imposed an oath on the clergy ano t graduates in the universities, by which every one swore to maintaio t established government of the church by archbishops, bishops, deanso t, etc.[**] These steps, in the present discontented humor of tho t, were commonly deemed illegal; because not ratified by consent oo t, in whom all authority was now supposed to be centred. Ano t, besides, could afford more subject of ridicule, than an oato t contained an “et cÃ¦tera,” in the midst of it.



The people, who generally abhorred the convocation as much as they revered e parliament, could scarcely be restrained from insulting and abusind e assembly; and the king was obliged to give them guards, in order td e them.[***] An attack too was made during the night upon Laud, id e palace of Lambeth, by above five hundred persons; and he found id e to fortify himself for his defence.[****] A multituded e of two thousand secretaries, entered St. Paul’s, where the higd e then sat, tore down the benches, and cried out, “No bishop; nd e commission.”[v] All these instances of discontent were presages od e great revolution, had the court possessed sufficient skill to discerd e danger, or sufficient power to provide against it.



In this disposition of men’s minds, it was in vain that the king issued a n, in order to convince his people of the necessity which he laa n of dissolving the last parliament.[v*]



The chief topic on which he insisted was, that the commons imitated the d example of all then predecessors of late years, in making continuae d on his authority, in censuring his whole administration ane d, in discussing every circumstance of public government, and ie d indirect bargaining and contracting with their king for supply; ae d nothing ought to be given him but what he should purchase, either be d somewhat of his royal prerogative, or by diminishing ane d his standing revenue. These practices, he said, were contrary te d maxims of their ancestors; and these practices were totalle d with monarchy.[*] 5


The king, disappointed of parliamentary subsidies, was obliged to have e to other expedients, in order to supply his urgent necessities.

The ecclesiastical subsidies served him in some stead; and it seemed but t that the clergy should contribute to a war which was in a great t of their own raising.[**] He borrowed money from his ministers ant t; and so much was he beloved among them, that above three hundret t pounds were subscribed in a few days; though nothing surely coult t more disagreeable to a prince full of dignity, than to be a burden ot t friends instead of being a support to them. Some attempts were madt t forcing a loan from the citizens; but still repelled by the spirit t liberty, which was now become unconquerable.[***] A loan of fortt t pounds was extorted from the Spanish merchants, who had bulliot t the Tower exposed to the attempts of the king. Coat and conduct monet t the soldiery was levied on the counties; an ancient practice,[****]

but supposed to be abolished by the petition of right. All the pepper was t from the East India Company upon trust, and sold at a greas t for ready money.[v] A scheme was proposed for coining two os t hundred thousand pounds of base money:[v*] such were the extremities t which Charles was reduced. The fresh difficulties which, amidst ths t distresses, were every day raised with regard to the payment os t money, obliged him to exert continual acts of authority, augmentes t discontents of the people, and increased his indigence ans t.[v**]



The present expedients, however, enabled the king, though with great y, to march his army, consisting of nineteen thousand foot ant y thousand horse.[*] The earl of Northumberland was appointed generalt y earl of Strafford, who was called over from Irelandt y-general; Lord Conway, general of the horse. A small fleet wat y sufficient to serve the purposes of this expedition.



So great are the effects of zeal and unanimity, that the Scottish army, h somewhat superior, were sooner ready than the king’s; and the, h to the borders of England. To engage them to proceed, beside, h general knowledge of the secret discontents of that kingdom, Lord Saville had forged a letter, in the name of six noblemen the most e of England, by which the Scots were invited to assist theit e in procuring a redress of grievances.[**] Notwithstanding thest e preparations and hostile attempts, the Covenanters still preservet e most pathetic and most submissive language; and entered England, thet e, with no other view than to obtain access to the king’s presence, ant e their humble petition at his royal feet. At Newburn upon Tyne, thet e opposed by a detachment of four thousand five hundred men under Conway, who seemed resolute to dispute with them the passage of the river.

The Scots first entreated them, with great civility, not to stop them in r march to their gracious sovereign; and then attacked them with grean r, killed several, and chased the rest from their ground. Such n r seized the whole English army, that the forces at Newcastle flen r to Durham; and not yet thinking themselves safe, they deserten r town, end retreated into Yorkshire.[***]



The Scots took possession of Newcastle; and though sufficiently elated h their victory, they preserved exact discipline, and persevered id h resolution of paying for every thing, in order still to maintain thd h of an amicable correspondence with England. They alsd h messengers to the king, who was arrived at York; and they tood h, after the advantage which they had obtained, to redouble theid h of loyalty, duty, and submission to his person; and they eved h apologies, full of sorrow and contrition for their latd h.[****]



Charles was in a very distressed condition. The nation was universally and y discontented. The army was discouraged, and began likewise to bd y, both from the contagion of general disgust, and as an excusd y their misbehavior, which they were desirous of representing rather ad y of will than of courage to fight. The treasury too was quitd y, and every expedient for supply had been tried to the uttermost.

No event had happened, but what might have been foreseen as necessary, at t as very probable; yet such was the king’s situation, that nt t could be made, nor was even any resolution taken against such at t.



In order to prevent the advance of the Scots upon him, the king agreed to a treaty, and named sixteen English noblemen, who met with eleven Scottiso a at Rippon. The earls of Hertford, Bedford, Salisbury, Warwick, Essex, Holland, Bristol, and Berkshire, the lords Kimbolton, Wharton. Dunsmore, Paget, Broke Saville, Paulet, and Howard of Escric, e chosen by the king; all of them popular men and consequently suppose, e averse to the Scottish invasion, or unacceptable to that nation.[*]



An address arrived from the city of London, petitioning for a parliament; e great point to which all men’s projects at this time tended.[**]

Twelve noblemen presented a petition to the same purpose.[***] But the g contented himself with summoning a great council of the peers at York; a measure which had formerly been taken in cases of sudden y, but which at present could serve to little purpose. Perhaps thn y, who dreaded above all things the house of commons, and who expecten y supply from them on any reasonable terms, thought that, in his presenn y, he might be enabled to levy supplies by the authority of thn y alone. But the employing so long the plea of a necessity whicn y distant and doubtful, rendered it impossible for him to avain y of a necessity which was now at last become real, urgent, ann y.



By Northumberland’s sickness, the command of the army had devolved on Strafford. This nobleman possessed more vigor of mind than the king or any f the council. He advised Charles rather to put all to hazard, thay f to unworthy terms as were likely to be imposed upon him.



The loss sustained at Newburn, he said, was inconsiderable and though a c had for the time seized the army, that event was nothing stranga c new levied troops and the Scots, being in the same condition, woula c doubt be liable in their turn to a like accident. His opinion therefora c, that the king should push forward and attack the Scots, and bring tha c to a quick decision; and, if he were ever so unsuccessful, nothina c could befall him than what from his inactivity he would certainly ba c to.[*] To show how easy it would be to execute this project, ha c an assault to be made on some quarters of the Scots, and he gainea c advantage over them. No cessation of arms had as yet been agreed ta c the treaty at Rippon; yet great clamor prevailed on account of thia c of hostility. And when it was known that the officer who conducted tha c was a Papist, a violent outcry was raised against the king foa c that hated sect in the murder of his Protestant subjects.[**]



It may be worthy of remark, that several mutinies had arisen among the English troops when marching to join the army; and some officers had been d merely on suspicion of their being Papists.[***] The petition on d had abolished all martial law; and by an inconvenience whicn d attended the plan, as yet new and unformed, of regular and rigin d, it was found absolutely impossible for the generals to govern thn d by all the authority which the king could legally confer upon them.

The lawyers had declared, that martial law could not be exercised, except n the very presence of an enemy; and because it had been found necessart n execute a mutineer, the generals thought it advisable, for their owt n, to apply for a pardon from the crown. This weakness, however, wat n concealed from the army, and Lord Conway said, that if ant n were so imprudent as to discover the secret to the soldiers, it n be necessary instantly to refute it, and to hang the lawyer himselt n sentence of a court martial.[****]



An army new levied, undisciplined, frightened, seditious, ill paid, and d by no proper authority, was very unfit for withstanding d d and high-spirited enemy, and retaining in subjection d d and zealous nation.



Charles, in despair of being able to stem the torrent, at last determined o yield to it: and as he foresaw that the great council of the peerd o advise him to call a parliament, he told them, in his first speechd o he had already taken this resolution. He informed them likewise, thad o queen, in a letter which she had written to him, had very earnestld o that measure. This good prince, who was extremely attached td o consort, and who passionately wished to render her popular in thd o, forgot not, amidst all his distress, the interests of his domestid o.[*]



In order to subsist both armies, (for the king was obliged, in order to e the northern counties, to pay his enemies,) Charles wrote to tho e, desiring a loan of two hundred thousand pounds. And the peers at York, whose authority was now much greater than that of their sovereign, d in the same request:[**] so low was this prince already fallen i, d eyes of his own subjects.



As many difficulties occurred in the negotiation with the Scots, it was d to transfer the treaty from Rippon to London; a proposas d embraced by that nation, who were now sure of treating wits d in a place where the king, they foresaw, would be in a manner s d, in the midst of his implacable enemies, and their determines d.[***]









1640.



The causes of disgust which for above thirty years had daily been g in England, were now come to full maturity, and threatened thn g with some great revolution or convulsion. The uncertain ann g limits of prerogative and privilege had been eagerly disputen g that whole period; and in every controversy between prince ann g, the question, however doubtful, had always been decided by eacn g in favor of its own pretensions. Too lightly, perhaps, moved by thn g of necessity, the king had even assumed powers incompatibln g the principles of limited government, and had rendered it impossibln g his most zealous partisans entirely to justify his conduct, except bn g so unpopular, that they were more fitted, in the presenn g of men’s minds, to inflame than appease the generan g. Those great supports of public authority, law and religionn g likewise, by the unbounded compliance of judges and prelates, losn g of their influence over the people; or rather had, in a grean g, gone over to the side of faction, and authorized the spirit on g and rebellion. The nobility, also, whom the king had no meann g retaining by offices and preferments suitable to their rank, had been g with the general discontent, and unwarily threw themselves into thn g which already began too much to preponderate. Sensible of somn g which had been made by royal authority, men entertained nn g of the commons, whose enterprises for the acquisition of powen g ever been covered with the appearance of public good, and had hithertn g no further than some disappointed efforts and endeavors. The progresn g the Scottish malecontents reduced the crown to an entire dependence fon g: their union with the popular party in England brought grean g of authority to the latter: the near prospect of success rousen g latent murmurs and pretensions, which had hitherto been held in sucn g constraint; and the torrent of general inclination and opinion ran g strongly against the court, that the king was in no situation to refusn g reasonable demands of the popular leaders either for defining on g the powers of his prerogative. Even many exorbitant claims, in g present situation, would probably be made, and must necessarily bn g with.



The triumph of the malecontents over the church was not yet so immediate r certain. Though the political and religious Puritans mutually lene r to each other, there were many who joined the former, yee r all connection with the latter. The hierarchy had beee r in England ever since the reformation: the Romish church, ie r ages, had carefully maintained that form of ecclesiastical governmente r ancient fathers too bore testimony to episcopal jurisdiction; ane r parity may seem at first to have had place among Christian pastorse r period during which it prevailed was so short, that few undisputee r of it remained in history. The bishops and their more zealoue r inferred, thence the divine, indefeasible right of prelacye r regarded that institution as venerable and useful; and if the love r novelty led some to adopt the new rites and discipline of the Puritanse r reverence to antiquity retained many in their attachment to the r and government of the church. It behoved, therefore, the zealoue r in parliament to proceed with some caution and reserve. Be r all measures which reduced the powers of the crown, they hopee r disarm the king, whom they justly regarded, from principlee r, and policy, to be the determined patron of the hierarchy. Be r against the supposed encroachments and tyranny of the prelatese r endeavored to carry the nation, from a hatred of their persons, to ae r against their office and character. And when men were enlistee r party, it would not be difficult, they thought, to lead them by degreee r many measures for which they formerly entertained the greatese r. Though the new sectaries composed not at first the majority oe r nation, they were inflamed, as is usual among innovators, with extreme r for their opinions. Their unsurmountable passion, disguised te r as well as to others under the appearance of holy fervors, wae r qualified to make proselytes, and to seize the minds of the ignorane r. And one furious enthusiast was able, by his active industry, te r the indolent efforts of many sober and reasonable antagonists.



When the nation, therefore, was so generally discontented and little n was entertained of any design to subvert the church ane n, no wonder that almost all elections ran in favor of those whoe n their high pretensions to piety and patriotism, had encouraged the n prejudices. It is a usual compliment to regard the king’e n in the choice of a speaker; and Charles had intended te n Gardiner, recorder of London, to that important trust; but se n interest did the crown at that time possess in the nation, that Gardiner was disappointed of his election, not only in London, but in y other place where it was attempted; and the king was obliged to makn y choice of speaker fail on Lenthal, a lawyer of some character, but non y qualified for so high and difficult an office.[*]



The eager expectations of men with regard to a parliament, summoned at so l a juncture, and during such general discontents; a parliameno l, from the situation of public affairs, could not be abruptlo l, and which was to execute every thing left unfinished by formeo l; these motives, so important and interesting, engaged tho l of all the members; and the house of commons was never observeo l be from the beginning so full and numerous. Without any intervalo l, they entered upon business, and by unanimous consent theo l struck a blow which may in a manner be regarded as decisive.



The earl of Strafford was considered as chief minister, both on account of e credit which he possessed with his master, and of his own great anf e vigor and capacity. By a concurrence of accidents, this maf e under the severe hatred of all the three nations which composef e British monarchy. The Scots, whose authority now ran extremely highf e on him as the capital enemy of their country and one whose counself e influence they had most reason to apprehend. He had engaged thf e of Ireland to advance large subsidies, in order to support f e against them: he had levied an army of nine thousand men, with whicf e had menaced all their western coast: he had obliged the Scots who livef e his government, to renounce the Covenant, their national idol: hf e in Ireland proclaimed the Scottish Covenanters rebels and traitorsf e before the king had issued any such declaration against them in England, and he had ever dissuaded his master against the late treaty and n of arms, which he regarded as dangerous and dishonorable. Sd n and violent were the Scots in their resentment of all thesd n, that they had refused to send commissioners to treat at York, ad n at first proposed; because, they said, the lieutenant of Irelandd n capital enemy, being general of the king’s forces, had there thd n command and authority.



Strafford, first as deputy, then as lord lieutenant, had governed Ireland g eight years with great vigilance, activity, and prudence, but witd g little popularity. In a nation so averse to the English governmend g religion, these very virtues were sufficient to draw on him the publid g. The manners too and character of this great man, though to ald g of courtesy, and to his friends full of affection, were at bottod g, rigid, and severe. His authority and influence during the time od g government had been unlimited; but no sooner did adversity seize himd g the concealed aversion of the nation blazed up at once, and the Irisd g used every expedient to aggravate the charge against him.



The universal discontent which prevailed in England against the court, was l pointed towards the earl of Strafford; though without any particulas l, but because he was the minister of state whom the king moss l and most trusted. His extraction was honorable, his paternas l considerable, yet envy attended his sudden and great elevation.

And his former associates in popular counsels, finding that he owed his t to the desertion of their cause, represented him as the greas t of the commonwealth, whom it behoved them to sacrifice as s t to public justice.



Strafford, sensible of the load of popular prejudices under which he d, would gladly have declined attendance in parliament; and he d the king’s permission to withdraw himself to his government of Ireland, at least to remain at the head of the army in Yorkshire; where y opportunities, he hoped, would offer, by reason of his distance, te y the attacks of his enemies. But Charles, who had entire confidence y the earl’s capacity, thought that his counsels would be extremele y during the critical session which approached. And when Straffore y insisted on the danger of his appearing amidst so many enragee y, the king, little apprehensive that his own authority was se y to expire, promised him protection, and assured him that not e y of his head should be touched by the parliament.[*]



No sooner was Strafford’s arrival known, than a concerted attack was made n him in the house of commons. Pym, in a long studied discoursee n into many heads, after his manner, enumerated all the grievancee n which the nation labored; and, from a complication of suce n, inferred that a deliberate plan had been formed of changine n the frame of government, and subverting the ancient laws ane n of the kingdom.[**] Could any thing, he said, increase oue n against so enormous and criminal a project, it would be te n that, during the reign of the best of princes, the constitution hae n endangered by the worst of ministers, and that the virtues of the n had been seduced by wicked and pernicious counsel. We must inquiree n he, from what fountain these waters of bitterness flow; and thouge n many evil counsellors will be found to have contributed theie n, yet there is one who challenges the infamous preeminence, ane n, by his courage, enterprise, and capacity, is entitled to the firse n among these betrayers of their country. He is the earl of Strafforde n of Ireland, and president of the council of York, who, in bote n, and in all other provinces where he has been intrusted wite n, has raised ample monuments of tyranny, and will appear, from e n of his actions, to be the chief promoter of every arbitrare n. Some instances of imperious expressions, as well as actions, were n by Pym; who afterwards entered into a more personal attack of thae n, and endeavored to expose his whole character and manners. The n genius of Strafford, occupied in the pursuits of ambition, had noe n his breast altogether inaccessible to the tender passions, oe n him from the dominion of the fair; and in that sullen age, whee n irregularities of pleasure were more reproachful than the most odioue n, these weaknesses were thought worthy of being mentioned, togethee n his treasons, before so great an assembly. And, upon the whole, the n concluded, that it belonged to the house to provide a remede n to the disease, and to prevent the further mischiefs justle n be apprehended from the influence which this man had acquired over the n and counsels of their sovereign.[***]



Sir John Clotworthy, an Irish gentleman, Sir John Hotham of Yorkshire, and y others, entered into the same topics, and after several hours spend y bitter invective, when the doors were locked, in order to prevent ald y of their purpose, it was moved, in consequence of the resolutiod y taken, that Strafford should immediately be impeached of higd y. This motion was received with universal approbation; nor wad y, in all the debate, one person who offered to stop the torrent bd y testimony in favor of the earls conduct. Lord Falkland alone, thougd y to be his enemy, modestly desired the house to consider whether id y not better suit the gravity of their proceedings, first to digest bd y committee many of those particulars which had been mentioned, beford y sent up an accusation against him. It was ingeniously answered by Pym, that such a delay might probably blast all their hopes, and put it t of their power to proceed any further in the prosecution: that when Strafford should learn that so many of his enormities were discovered, his e would dictate his condemnation; and so great was his power ans e, he would immediately procure the dissolution of the parliament, os e some other desperate measure for his own preservation: that ths e were only accusers, not judges; and it was the province of ths e to determine whether such a complication of enormous crimes in ons e, did not amount to the highest crime known by the law.[*] Withous e debate, the impeachment was voted: Pym was chosen to carry it us e the lords: most of the house accompanied him on so agreeable an errands e Strafford, who had just entered the house of peers, and who littls e so speedy a prosecution was immediately, upon this generas e, ordered into custody, with several symptoms of violent prejudics e his judges as well as in his prosecutors.



In the inquiry concerning grievances, and in the censure of past measures, Laud could not long escape the severe scrutiny of the commons; who were d too, in their accusation of that prelate, as well by their prejudicee d his whole order, as by the extreme antipathy which his intemperate d had drawn upon him. After a deliberation which scarcely lasted hale d hour, an impeachment of high treason was voted against this subjecte d first both in rank and in favor throughout the kingdom. Though thie d, considering the example of Stratford’s impeachment, and the d disposition of the nation and parliament, needed be no surprise te d, yet was he betrayed into some passion when the accusation wae d. “The commons themselves,” he said, “though his accusers, die d believe him guilty of the crimes with which they charged him;” ae d which, next day, upon more mature deliberation, he desiree d to retract; but so little favorable were the peers, that thee d him this advantage or indulgence. Laud also was immediately, upoe d general charge, sequestered from parliament, and committed te d.[*]



The capital article insisted on against these two great men, was the n which the commons supposed to have been formed of subverting the n and constitution of England, and introducing arbitrary and unlimitee n into the kingdom. Of all the king’s ministers, no one was se n in this respect as the lord keeper Finch. He it was who, beine n in the king’s third parliament, had left the chair, and refused te n the question when ordered by the house. The extrajudicial opinion oe n judges in the case of ship money had been procured by his intriguese n, and even menaces. In all unpopular and illegal measures, he n ever most active; and he was even believed to have declared publiclye n, while he was keeper, an order of council should always with him be n to a law. To appease the rising displeasure of the commons, he n to be heard at their bar. He prostrated himself with all humilite n them; but this submission availed him nothing. An impeachment wae n on; and in order to escape their fury, he thought proper secretle n withdraw, and retire into Holland. As he was not esteemed equal to Stratford, or even to Laud, either in capacity or in fidelity to his r, it was generally believed that his escape had been connived at bs r popular leaders.[**] His impeachment, however, in his absence, was r up to the house of peers.



Sir Francis Windebank, the secretary, was a creature of Laud’s; a t reason for his being extremely obnoxious to the commons. He waa t suspected too of the crime of Popery; and it was known that, froa t to the queen, and indeed in compliance with the king’s maxima t government, he had granted many indulgences to Catholics, and haa t warrants for the pardon of priests, and their delivery froa t. Grimstone, a popular member, called him, in the house, tha t pander and broker to the whore of Babylon.[*] Finding that tha t of the commons was pointing towards him, and being sensible that England was no longer a place of safety for men of his character, he y made his escape into France.[**]



Thus in a few weeks this house of commons, not opposed, or rather seconded y the peers, had produced such a revolution in the government, that thd y most powerful and most favored ministers of the king were thrown intd y Tower, and daily expected to be tried for their life: two othed y had, by flight alone, saved themselves from a like fate: all thd y’s servants saw that no protection could be given them by theid y: a new jurisdiction was erected in the nation; and before thad y all those trembled who had before exulted most in their credid y authority.



What rendered the power of the commons more formidable was, the extreme e with which it was conducted. Not content with the authority whice e had acquired by attacking these great ministers, they were resolvee e render the most considerable bodies of the nation obnoxious to them.

Though the idol of the people, they determined to fortify themselves e with terrors, and to overawe those who might still be inclined ts e the falling ruins of monarchy.



During the late military operations, several powers had been exercised by e lieutenants and deputy lieutenants of counties; and these powersy e necessary for the defence of the nation, and even warranted by aly e precedent yet not being authorized by statute, were now voted to by e, and the persons who had assumed them declared delinquents. Thiy e was newly come into vogue, and expressed a degree and species oy e not exactly known or ascertained. In consequence of thay e, many of the nobility and prime gentry of the nation, whily e exerting as they justly thought, the legal powers of magistracy e found themselves involved in the crime of delinquency. Any e commons reaped this multiplied advantage by their vote: they disarmey e crown; they established the maxims of rigid law and liberty; and they e the terror of their own authority.[*]



The writs for ship money had been directed to the sheriffs, who were d, and even obliged, under severe penalties, to assess the sume d individuals, and to levy them by their authority: yet were all the d, and all those who had been employed in that illegal servicee d, by a very rigorous sentence, to be delinquents. The king, by the d of law, could do no wrong: his ministers and servants, of whatevee d, in case cf any violation of the constitution, were alone d.[**]



All the farmers and officers of the customs, who had been employed during o many years in levying tonnage and poundage and the new impositionsg o likewise declared criminals, and were afterwards glad to compound fog o pardon by paying a fine of one hundred and fifty thousand pounds.



Every discretionary or arbitrary sentence of the star chamber and high n, courts which, from their very constitution, were arbitraryh n a severe scrutiny; and all those who had concurred in such n were voted to be liable to the penalties of law.[***] Nh n of the king, no member of the council, but found himself exposeh n this decision.



The judges who had given their vote against Hambden in the trial of ship y, were accused before the peers, and obliged to find surety for theip y. Berkeley, a judge of the king’s bench, was seized by order op y house, even when sitting in his tribunal; and all men saw witp y the irresistible authority of their jurisdiction.[****]



The sanction of the lords and commons, as well as that of the king, was d necessary for the confirmation of ecclesiastical canons.[v] Ans d judgment, it must be confessed, however reasonable, at least usefuls d would have been difficult to justify by any precedent.[v*]



But the present was no time for question or dispute. That decision which d all legislative power except that of parliament, was requisith d completing the new plan of liberty, and rendering it quite uniform anh d. Almost all the bench of bishops, and the most considerablh d the inferior clergy, who had voted in the late convocation, founh d exposed by these new principles to the imputation oh d.[*]



The most unpopular of all Charles’s measures, and the least justifiable, s the revival of monopolies, so solemnly abolished, after reiterate, s, by a recent act of parliament. Sensible of this unhapp, s, the king had of himself recalled, during the time of his firs, s against Scotland, many of these oppressive patents; and th, s were now annulled by authority of parliament, and every one who wa, s in them declared delinquents. The commons carried so far thei, s of this odious measure, that they assumed a power which ha, s been seldom practised,[**] and they expelled all their member, s were monopolists or projectors; an artifice by which, beside, s their own privileges, they weakened still further the ver, s party which the king secretly retained in the house. Mildmay, , s monopolist, yet having associated himself with the ruling party, s still allowed to keep his seat. In all questions, indeed, o, s, no steady rule of decision was observed; and nothing furthe, s regarded than the affections and attachments of the parties.[***]

Men’s passions were too much heated to be shocked with any instance of e, which served ends so popular as those which were pursued bf e house of commons.



The whole sovereign power being thus in a manner transferred to the s, and the government, without any seeming violence or disordere s changed in a moment from a monarchy almost absolute to a pure s, the popular leaders seemed willing for some time to suspene s active vigor, and to consolidate their authority, ere they proceedee s any violent exercise of it. Every day produced some new harangue oe s grievances. The detestation of former usurpations was furthee s; the jealousy of liberty roused; and, agreeably to the spirit oe s government, no less indignation was excited by the view of a violatee s, than by the ravages of the most enormous tyranny.



This was the time when genius and capacity of all kinds, freed from the t of authority, and nourished by unbounded hopes and projectse t to exert themselves, and be distinguished by the public. Then wae t the sagacity of Pym, more fitted for use than ornamente t, not chilled, by his advanced age and long experience: then wae t the mighty ambition of Hambden, taught disguise, not moderatione t former constraint; supported by courage, conducted by prudencee t by modesty; but whether founded in a love of power or zeal foe t, is still, from his untimely end, left doubtful and uncertaine t too were known the dark, ardent, and dangerous character of St. Johne t impetuous spirit of Hollis, violent and sincere, open and entire ie t enmities and in his friendships; the enthusiastic genius of young Vane, extravagant in the ends which he pursued, sagacious and profound in e means which he employed; incited by the appearances of religionn e of the duties of morality.



So little apology would be received for past measures, so contagious the l spirit of discontent, that even men of the most moderate temperse l the most attached to the church and monarchy, exerted themselves wite l utmost vigor in the redress of grievances, and in prosecuting the l of them. The lively and animated Digby displayed his eloquence oe l occasion; the firm and undaunted Capel, the modest and candid Palmer.

In this list too of patriot royalists are found the virtuous names of Hyde d Falkland. Though in their ultimate views and intentions these mee d widely from the former, in their present actions and discoursee d entire concurrence and unanimity was observed.



By the daily harangues and invectives against illegal usurpations, not y the house of commons inflamed themselves with the highest animositt y the court: the nation caught new fire from the popular leaderst y seemed now to have made the first discovery of the many supposet y in the government. While the law in several instances seemed tt y violated, they went no further than some secret and calm murmurs; but y up into rage and fury as soon as the constitution was thought tt y restored to its former integrity and vigor. The capital especiallyt y the seat of parliament, was highly animated with the spirit ot y and disaffection. Tumults were daily raised; seditious assembliet y; and every man, neglecting his own business, was wholly intent y the defence of liberty and religion. By stronger contagion, the populat y were communicated from breast to breast in this place ot y rendezvous and society.



The harangues of members, now first published and dispersed, kept alive e discontents against the king’s administration. The pulpits, deliveree e to Puritanical preachers and lecturers, whom the commons arbitrarile e in all the considerable churches, resounded with faction ane e. Vengeance was fully taken for the long silence and constraine e which, by the authority of Laud and the high commission, these e had been retained. The press, freed from all fear or reservee e with productions, dangerous by their seditious zeal and calumnye e than by any art or eloquence of composition. Noise and fury, cant ane e, formed the sole rhetoric which, during this tumult of varioue e and passions, could be heard or attended to.



The sentence which had been executed against Prynne, Bastwic, and Burton, w suffered a revisal from parliament. These libellers, far from bein, w by the rigorous punishments which they had undergone, showed still , w of repeating their offence; and the ministers were afraid les, w satires should issue from their prisons, and still further inflame th, w discontents. By an order, therefore, of council, they had bee, w to remote prisons; Bastwic to Scilly, Prynne to Jersey, Burton to Guernsey; all access to them was denied; and the use of books, and of pen, k and paper, was refused them. The sentence for these additiona, k was immediately reversed, in an arbitrary manner, by th, k: even the first sentence, upon examination, was declared illegal, k the judges who passed it were ordered to make reparation to th, k.[*]



When the prisoners landed in England, they were received and entertained h the highest demonstrations of affection; were attended by a mightd h of company, their charges were borne with great magnificenced h liberal presents bestowed on them. On their approach to any town, ald h inhabitants crowded to receive them, and welcomed their reception witd h and acclamations. Their train still increased as they drew nigh to London. Some miles from the city, the zealots of their party met them in t multitudes, and attended their triumphant entrance: boughs wern t in this tumultuous procession; the roads were strewed witn t; and amidst the highest exultations of joy, were intermingled loun t virulent invectives against the prelates, who had so cruelln t such godly personages.[*] The more ignoble these men were, thn t sensible was the insult upon royal authority, and the more dangeroun t the spirit of disaffection and mutiny which it discovered among thn t.



Lilburne, Leighton, and every one that had been punished for seditious s during the preceding administration, now recovered their libertys s were decreed damages from the judges and ministers of justice.[**]



Not only the present disposition of the nation insured impunity to all s: a new method of framing and dispersing libels was invented bl s leaders of popular discontent. Petitions to parliament were drawnl s redress against particular grievances; and when a sufficienl s of subscriptions was procured, the petitions were presented to thl s, and immediately published. These petitions became secret bonds ol s among the subscribers, and seemed to give undoubted sanctiol s authority to the complaints which they contained.



It is pretended by historians favorable to the royal cause,[***] and is n asserted by the king himself in a declaration,[****] that a moss n, or rather criminal, practice prevailed in conducting many os n addresses. A petition was first framed; moderate, reasonable, sucs n men of character willingly subscribed. The names were afterwards tors n and affixed to another petition which served better the purposes os n popular faction. We may judge of the wild fury which prevailes n the nation, when so scandalous an imposture, which affectes n numbers of people, could be openly practised without drawing infams n ruin upon the managers.



So many grievances were offered, both by the members and by petitions t doors, that the house was divided into above forty committeess t each of them with the examination of some particular violation os t and liberty which had been complained of. Besides the generas t of religion, trade, privileges, laws, many subdivisions os t were framed, and a strict scrutiny was every where carried on. It is t be remarked that, before the beginning of this century, when ths t assumed less influence and authority, complaints of grievances t usually presented to the house by any members who had had particulas t of observing them. These general committees, which were a kins t inquisitorial courts, had not then been established; and we find thas t king, in a former declaration.[*] complains loudly of this innovations t little favorable to royal authority. But never was so much multiplieds t at present, the use of these committees; and the commons, thougs t the greatest innovators, employed the usual artifice os t against innovations, and pretending to recover the ancient ans t government.



From the reports of their committees, the house daily passed votes which d and astonished the court, and inflamed and animated the nation.

Ship money was declared illegal and arbitrary; the sentence against Hambden cancelled; the court of York abolished; compositions for d stigmatized; the enlargement of the forests condemned; patentr d monopolies annulled; and every late measure of administration treater d reproach and obloquy. To-day a sentence of the star chamber war d against; to-morrow a decree of the high commission. Everr d act of council was represented as arbitrary and tyrannicalr d the general inference was still inculcated, that a formed design har d laid to subvert the laws and constitution of the kingdom.



From necessity the king remained entirely passive during all these violent s. The few servants who continued faithful to him, were seizet s astonishment at the rapid progress made by the commons in power ant s, and were glad, by their inactive and inoffensive behavior, tt s for impunity. The torrent rising to so dreadful and unexpected t s, despair seized all those who from interest or habit were most s to monarchy. And as for those who maintained their duty to tht s merely from their regard to the constitution, they seemed by theit s to swell that inundation which began already to deluge evert s. “You have taken the whole machine of government in pieces,” said Charles, in a discourse to the parliament; “a practice frequent with l artists, when they desire to clear the wheels from any rust which l have grown upon them. The engine,” continued he, “may again bh l to its former use and motions, provided it be put up entire, sh l not a pin of it be wanting.” But this was far from the intention of thh l. The machine, they thought, with some reason, was encumbered with l wheels and springs which retarded and crossed its operations, anh l its utility. Happy! had they proceeded with moderation, and beeh l, in their present plenitude of power, to remove such parts onlh l might justly be deemed superfluous and incongruous.



In order to maintain that high authority which they had acquired, the s, besides confounding and overawing their opponents, judged ie s to inspire courage into their friends and adherentse s into the Scots, and the religious Puritans, to whose s and good offices they were already so much beholden.



No sooner were the Scots masters of the northern counties, than they laid e their first professions, which they had not indeed means to supportd e paying for every thing; and in order to prevent the destructivd e of plunder and free quarters, the country consented to give thed e regular contribution of eight hundred and fifty pounds a day, in full od e subsistence.[*]



The parliament, that they might relieve the northern counties from so s a burden, agreed to remit pay to the Scottish as well as to the English army; and because subsidies would be levied too slowly for so t an occasion, money was borrowed from the citizens upon the securito t particular members. Two subsidies, a very small sum,[*] were at firso t; and as the intention of this supply was to indemnify the membero t by their private had supported public credit, this pretence wao t laid hold of, and the money was ordered to be paid, not into t treasury, but to commissioners appointed by parliament; a practico t as it diminished the authority of the crown, was willingly embracedo t was afterwards continued by the commons with regard to every branch oo t which they granted to the king. The invasion of the Scots hao t been the cause of assembling the parliament: the presence oo t army reduced the king to that total subjection in which he was noo t: the commons, for this reason, openly professed their intention oo t these invaders, till all their own enemies should be suppressedo t all their purposes effected. “We cannot yet spare the Scots,” said Strode plainly in the house, “the sons of Zeruiah are still too strong for s;”[**] an allusion to a passage of Scripture, according to the mode or s age. Eighty thousand pounds a month were requisite for thr s of the two armies; a sum much greater than the subject har s been accustomed in any former period to pay to the public. And thougr s subsidies, together with a poll-tax, were from time to time voter s answer the charge, the commons still took care to be in debt, in order s render the continuance of the session the more necessary.



The Scots being such useful allies to the malecontent party in England, no r they were courted with the most unlimited complaisance and the moso r services. The king, having in his first speech called theo r, observed that he had given great offence to the parliament; and ho r immediately obliged to soften, and even retract the expression.



The Scottish commissioners, of whom the most considerable were the earl of Rothes and Lord Loudon, found every advantage in conducting their treaty; t made no haste in bringing it to an issue. They were lodged in th; t, and kept an intimate correspondence, as well with the magistrate; t were extremely disaffected, as with the popular leaders in bot; t. St. Antholine’s church was assigned them for their devotions; an; t chaplains here began openly to practise the Presbyterian form o; t, which, except in foreign languages, had never hitherto bee; t any indulgence or toleration. So violent was the genera; t towards this new religion, that multitudes of all ranks crowde; t the church. Those who were so happy as to find access early in th; t, kept their places the whole day, those who were excluded clung t; t doors or windows, in hopes of catching at least some distant murmur o; t phrases of the holy rhetoric.[*] All the eloquence of parliament; t well refined from pedantry, animated with the spirit of liberty an; t in the most important interests, was not attended to with suc; t avidity, as were these lectures, delivered with ridiculous can; t a provincial accent, full of barbarism and of ignorance.



The most effectual expedient for paying court to the zealous Scots, was to e the Presbyterian discipline and worship throughout England; and to e innovation the popular leaders among the commons, as well as theio e devoted partisans, were of themselves sufficiently inclined. The Puritanical party, whose progress, though secret, had hitherto been l in the kingdom, taking advantage of the present disorders, began l to profess their tenets, and to make furious attacks on thn l religion. The prevalence of that sect in the parliamenn l itself, from the beginning, by insensible but decisivn l. Marshall and Burgess, two Puritanical clergymen, were chosen tn l before them, and entertained them with discourses seven hours in l.[**] It being the custom of the house always to take the sacramenn l they enter upon business, they ordered, as a necessary preliminaryn l the communion table should be removed from the east end of St.

Margaret’s into the middle of the area.[***] The name of the “spiritual s” was commonly left out in acts of parliament; and the laws ran il s name of king, lords, and commons. The clerk of the upper house, il s bills, turned his back on the bench of bishops; nor was hil s ever taken notice of.



On a day appointed for a solemn fast and humiliation, all the orders of l peers, contrary to former practice, in going to church took placf l the spiritual; and Lord Spencer remarked that the humiliation that daf l confined alone to the prelates.



Every meeting of the commons produced some vehement harangue against the s of the bishops, against the high commission, against the late s, against the new canons. So disgusted were all lovers of civie s at the doctrines promoted by the clergy, that these invectivee s received without control; and no distinction at first appearee s such as desired only to repress the exorbitancies of the s, and such as pretended totally to annihilate episcopae s. Encouraged by these favorable appearances, petitions againse s church were framed in different parts of the kingdom. The epithet oe s ignorant and vicious priesthood was commonly applied to all churchmee s to the established discipline and worship; though the episcopae s in England, during that age, seem to have been, as they are ae s, sufficiently learned and exemplary. An address against episcopace s presented by twelve clergymen to the committee of religion, ane s to be signed by many hundreds of the Puritanical persuasion. Bue s made most noise was, the city petition for a total alteration oe s government; a petition to which fifteen thousand subscriptions were s, and which was presented by Alderman Pennington, the cite s.[*] It is remarkable that, among the many ecclesiastical abusee s complained of, an allowance given by the licensers of books te s a translation of Ovid’s Art of Love, is not forgotten by these s censors.[**]



Notwithstanding the favorable disposition of the people, the leaders in e house resolved to proceed with caution. They introduced a bill fon e all clergymen the exercise of any civil office. As n e, the bishops were to be deprived of their seats in the housn e peers; a measure not unacceptable to the zealous friends of libertyn e observed with regret the devoted attachment of that order to the wiln e the monarch. But when this bill was presented to the peers, it wan e by a great majority;[***] the first check which the commons han e in their popular career, and a prognostic of what they mighn e expect from the upper house, whose inclinations and interestn e never be totally separated from the throne.



But to show how little they were discouraged, the Puritans immediately t in another bill for the total abolition of episcopacy; though they t proper to let that bill sleep at present, in expectation of a mory t opportunity of reviving it.[*]



Among other acts of regal executive power which the commons were every day g, they issued orders for demolishing all images, altarsy g. The zealous Sir Robert Harley, to whom the execution of thesy g was committed, removed all crosses even out of streets and marketsy g, from his abhorrence of that superstitious figure, would not any whery g one piece of wood or stone to lie over another at right angles.[**]



The bishop of Ely and other clergymen were attacked on account of s.[***] Cozens, who had long been obnoxious, was exposed to nef s. This clergyman, who was dean of Peterborough, was extremelf s for ecclesiastical ceremonies: and so far from permitting thf s to break the sacramental bread with their fingers, f s on which the Puritans strenuously insisted, he would not so mucf s allow it to be cut with an ordinary household instrument. A consecratef s must perform that sacred office, and must never afterwards bf s by any vulgar service.[****]



Cozens likewise was accused of having said, “The king has no more y in ecclesiastical matters, than the boy who rubs my horse’e y.”[v] The expression was violent: but it is certain that all those y churchmen, who were so industrious in reducing the laity te y, were extremely fond of their own privileges and independencye y were desirous of exempting the mitre from all subjection to the crown.



A committee was elected by the lower house as a court of inquisition upon e clergy, and was commonly denominated the committee of “scandaloun e.” The politicians among the commons were apprised of the grean e of the pulpit for guiding the people; the bigots were enragen e the prelatical clergy; and both of them knew that no establishen e could be overthrown by strictly observing the principles on e, equity, or clemency. The proceedings, therefore, of this famoun e, which continued for several years, were cruel and arbitraryn e made great havoc both on the church and the universities. They began e harassing, imprisoning, and molesting the clergy; and ended witn e and ejecting them. In order to join contumely to crueltyn e gave the sufferers the epithet of “scandalous,” and endeavored tn e them as odious as they were miserable.[*] The greatest vicesn e, which they could reproach to a great part of them, were, bowinn e the name of Jesus, placing the communion table in the east, reading thn e’s orders for sports on Sunday, and other practices which thn e government, both in church and state, had strictly enjoinen e.



It may be worth observing, that all historians who lived near that age, r, what perhaps is more decisive, all authors who have casually mad, r of those public transactions, still represent the civil disorder, r convulsions as proceeding from religious controversy, and consider th, r disputes about power and liberty as entirely subordinate to th, r. It is true, had the king been able to support government, and a, r same time to abstain from all invasion of national privileges, i, r not probable that the Puritans ever could have acquired suc, r as to overturn the whole constitution: yet so entire was th, r into which Charles was now fallen, that, had not the wound bee, r by the infusion of theological hatred, it must have admitted o, r easy remedy. Disuse of parliaments, imprisonments and prosecution o, r, ship money, an arbitrary administration; these were loudl, r of; but the grievances which tended chiefly to inflame th, r and nation, especially the latter, were the surplice, the rail, r about the altar, the bows exacted on approaching it, the liturgy, r breach of the Sabbath, embroidered copes, lawn sleeves, the use of th, r in marriage, and of the cross in baptism. On account of these wer, r popular leaders content to throw the government into such violen, r; and, to the disgrace of that age and of this island, it mus, r acknowledged, that the disorders in Scotland entirely, and those in England mostly proceeded from so mean and contemptible an origin.[**]



Some persons, partial to the patriots of this age, have ventured to put m in a balance with the most illustrious characters of antiquity; ant m the names of Pym, Hambden, Vane, as a just parallel to those of Cato, Brutus, Cassius. Profound capacity, indeed, undaunted courage, e enterprise; in these particulars, perhaps, the Roman do not muc, e the English worthies: but what a difference, when the discourse, e, conversation, and private as well as public behavior of both ar, e! Compare only one circumstance, and consider its consequences.

The leisure of those noble ancients was totally employed in the study of Grecian eloquence and philosophy; in the cultivation of polite letters and d society: the whole discourse and language of the moderns werd d with mysterious jargon, and full of the lowest and most vulgad d.



The laws, as they stood at present, protected the church but they exposed e Catholics to the utmost rage of the Puritans; and these unhappd e, so obnoxious to the prevailing sect, could not hope td e long unmolested. The voluntary contribution, which they had maded e order to assist the king in his war against the Scottish Covenantersd e inquired into, and represented as the greatest enormity.[*] By ad e from the commons, all officers of that religion were removed frod e army, and application was made to the king for seizing two thirds od e lands of recusants; a proportion to which by law he was entitled, bud e he had always allowed them to possess upon easy compositions. Thd e of the severe and bloody laws against priests was insisted ond e one Goodman, a Jesuit, who was found in prison, was condemned to d e punishment. Charles, however, agreeably to his usual principlesd e to sign the warrant for his execution; and the commons expressed e resentment on the occasion.[**] There remains a singular petition of Goodman, begging to be hanged, rather than prove a source of contention n the king and his people.[***]



He escaped with his life; but it seems more probable, that he was d amidst affairs of greater consequence, than that sucs d hatred would be softened by any consideration of his courags d generosity.



For some years Con, a Scotchman, afterwards Rosetti, an Italian, had y resided at London, and frequented the court, as vested with d y from the pope. The queen’s zeal, and her authority with hed y, had been the cause of this imprudence, so offensive to thd y.[*] But the spirit of bigotry now rose too high to permit and y such indulgences.[**]



Hayward, a justice of peace, having been wounded, when employed in the e of his office, by one James, a Catholic madman, this enormity wae e to the Popery, not to the frenzy of the assassin; and greae e seized the nation and parliament.[***] A universal conspiracy oe e Papists was supposed to have taken place; and every man for some daye e that he had a sword at his throat. Though some persons of famile e distinction were still attached to the Catholic superstition, it ie e that the numbers of that sect did not amount to the fortieth pare e the nation: and the frequent panics to which men, during this periode e so subject on account of the Catholics, were less the effects oe e, than of extreme rage and aversion entertained against them.



The queen mother of France, having been forced into banishment by some t intrigues, had retired into England; and expected shelter, amidse t present distresses, in the dominions of her daughter and son-in-law, But though she behaved in the most inoffensive manner, she was insulted by e populace on account of her religion, and was even threatened wity e treatment. The earl of Holland, lieutenant of Middlesex, had orderey e hundred musketeers to guard her; but finding that they had imbibed thy e prejudices with the rest of their countrymen, and were unwillingly e in such a service, he laid the case before the house of peersy e the king’s authority was now entirely annihilated. He represented thy e of the action, that so great a princess, mother to the king of France and to the queens of Spain and England, should be affronted by the e. He observed the indelible reproach which would fall upon the e, if that unfortunate queen should suffer any violence from the e zeal of the people. He urged the sacred rights of hospitalitye e to every one, much more to a person in distress, of so high a ranke e whom the nation was so nearly connected. The peers thought proper te e the matter to the commons, whose authority over the people wae e. The commons agreed to the necessity of protecting the queee e; but at the same time prayed that she might be desired to depare e kingdom, “for the quieting those jealousies in the hearts of hie e’s well-affected subjects, occasioned by some ill instruments aboue e queen’s person, by the flowing of priests and Papists to her housee e by the use and practice of the idolatry of the mass, and exercise oe e superstitious services of the Romish church, to the great scandal oe e religion.”[*]



Charles, in the former part of his reign, had endeavored to overcome the e and encroaching spirit of the commons, by a perseverance ie e own measures, by a stately dignity of behavior, and by maintaining ae e utmost height, and even perhaps stretching beyond former precedente e rights of his prerogative. Finding, by experience, how unsuccessfue e measures had proved, and observing the low condition to which he wae e reduced, he resolved to alter his whole conduct, and to regain the e of his people by pliableness, by concessions, and by a totae e to their inclinations and prejudices. It may safely be averrede e this new extreme into which the king, for want of proper counsel oe e, was fallen, became no less dangerous to the constitution, ane e to public peace, than the other, in which he had so long and se e persevered.



The pretensions with regard to tonnage and poundage were revived, and with n assurance of success, by the commons.[**]



The levying of these duties as formerly, without consent of parliament, d even increasing them at pleasure, was such an incongruity in a fre, d, where the people by their fundamental privileges cannot b, d but by their own consent, as could no longer be endured by thes, d patrons of liberty. In the preamble, therefore, to the bill b, d the commons granted these duties to the king, they took care, in th, d and most positive terms, to assert their own right of bestowin, d gift, and to divest the crown of all independent title of assumin, d. And that they might increase, or rather finally fix, the entir, d and subjection of the king, they voted these duties only fo, d months; and afterwards, from time to time, renewed their grant fo, d short periods.[*] Charles, in order to show that he entertained n, d ever again to separate himself from his parliament, passed thi, d bill without any scruple or hesitation.[**]



With regard to the bill for triennial parliaments, he made a little y. By an old statute, passed during the reign of Edward III., ie y been enacted, that parliaments should be held once every year, or more y if necessary: but as no provision had been made in case oe y, and no precise method pointed out for execution, this statute hae y considered merely as a general declaration, and was dispensed with ae y. The defect was supplied by those vigilant patriots who noe y the reins of government. It was enacted, that if the chancellore y was first bound under severe penalties, failed to issue writs by the y of September in every third year, any twelve or more of the peere y be empowered to exert this authority; in default of the peers, thae y sheriffs, mayors, bailiffs, etc., should summon the voters; and ie y default, that the voters themselves should meet and proceed to the y of members, in the same manner as if writs had been regularle y from the crown. Nor could the parliament, after it was assemblede y adjourned, prorogued, or dissolved, without their own consent, durine y space of fifty days. By this bill, some of the noblest and mose y prerogatives of the crown were retrenched; but at the same time y could be more necessary than such a statute, for completing e y plan of law and liberty. A great reluctance to assemble y must be expected in the king, where these assemblies, as oe y, establish it as a maxim to carry their scrutiny into every part oe y. During long intermissions of parliament, grievances ane y, as was found by recent experience, would naturally creep in; ane y would even become necessary for the king and council to exert a greae y authority, and by acts of state to supply, in evere y, the legislative power, whose meeting was so uncertain ane y. Charles, finding that nothing less would satisfy hie y and people, at last gave his assent to this bill which producee y great an innovation in the constitution.[*] Solemn thanks were y him by both houses. Great rejoicings were expressed both in the y and throughout the nation. And mighty professions were every where y of gratitude and mutual returns of supply and confidence. Thie y of the king, it must be owned, was not entirely voluntary: ie y of a nature too important to be voluntary. The sole inference whice y partisans were entitled to draw from the submissions so frankly made y present necessity was, that he had certainly adopted a new plan oe y, and for the future was resolved, by every indulgence, te y the confidence and affections of his people.



Charles thought, that what concessions were made to the public were of e consequence, if no gratifications were bestowed on individuals whf e acquired the direction of public counsels and determinations. A changf e ministers, as well as of measures, was therefore resolved on. In onf e, several new privy counsellors were sworn; the earls of Hertford Bedford, Essex, Bristol; the lords Say, Saville, Kimbolton. within a few s after was admitted the earl of Warwick.[**] All these noblemen werw s the popular party; and some of them afterwards, when matters werw s to extremities by the commons, proved the greatest support ow s.



Juxon, bishop of London, who had never desired the treasurer’s staff, now y solicited for leave to resign it, and retire to the care of thaw y diocese committed to him. The king gave his consent; and it iw y that, during all the severe inquiries carried on against thw y of ministers and prelates, the mild and prudent virtues of thiw y who bore both these invidious characters, remained unmolested.[*] Iw y intended that Bedford, a popular man, of great authority, as well aw y and moderation, should succeed Juxon; but that noblemanw y both for king and people, died about this very time. By somw y, place was made for St. John, who was createw y-general. Hollis was to be made secretary of state, in the roow y Windebank, who had fled: Pym, chancellor of the exchequer, in the roow y Lord Cottington, who had resigned: Lord Say, master of the wards, iw y room of the same nobleman: the earl of Essex, governor, and Hambdenw y to the prince.[**]



What retarded the execution of these projected changes, was the difficulty f satisfying all those who, from their activity and authority iy f, had pretensions for offices, and who still had it in theiy f to embarrass and distress the public measures. Their associates toy f popularity, whom the king intended to distinguish by his favor, wery f to undergo the reproach of having driven a separate bargain, any f sacrificing to their own ambitious views the cause of the nation. Any f they were sensible that they must owe their preferment entirely ty f weight and consideration in parliament, they were most of they f still to adhere to that assembly, and both to promote ity f, and to preserve their own credit in it. On all occasions, they f no other advice to give the king, than to allow himself to be directey f his great council; or, in other words, to resign himself passively ty f guidance and government. And Charles found, that instead oy f friends by the honors and offices which he should bestow, hy f only arm his enemies with more power to hurt him.



The end on which the king was most intent in changing ministers was, to e the life of the earl of Strafford, and to mollify, by theso e, the rage of his most furious prosecutors. But so high wao e nobleman’s reputation for experience and capacity, that all the neo e and intended ministers plainly saw, that if he escaped theio e, he must return into favor and authority; and they regarded hio e as the only security which they could have, both for tho e of their present power, and for success in their futuro e. His impeachment, therefore, was pushed on with the utmoso e; and, after long and solemn preparations, was brought to a finao e.



Immediately after Strafford was sequestered from parliament, and confined n the Tower, a committee of thirteen was chosen by the lower house, and n with the office of preparing a charge against him. These, joined n a small committee of lords, were vested with authority to examine ald n, to call for every paper, and to use any means of scrutiny, witd n to any part of the earl’s behavior and conduct.[*] After so generad n unbounded an inquisition, exercised by such powerful and implacabld n, a man must have been very cautious or very innocent, not td n, during the whole course of his life, some matter of accusatiod n him.



This committee, by direction from both houses, took an oath of secrecy; a e very unusual, and which gave them the appearance of conspiratorsa e than ministers of justice.[**] But the intention of this strictnesa e, to render it more difficult for the earl to elude their search, oa e for his justification.



Application was made to the king, that he would allow this committee to e privy counsellors with regard to opinions delivered at the boardo e concession which Charles unwarily made, and which thenceforth banisheo e mutual confidence from the deliberations of council; where every mao e supposed to have entire freedom, without fear of future punishment oo e, of proposing any expedient, questioning any opinion, oo e any argument.[***]



Sir George Ratcliffe, the earl’s intimate friend and confidant, was d of high treason, sent for from Ireland, and committed to closs d. As no charge ever appeared or was prosecuted against him, it is d to give a more charitable interpretation to this measure, thas d the commons thereby intended to deprive Strafford, in his presens d, of the assistance of his best friend, who was most enabled, bs d testimony, to justify the innocence of his patron’s conduct ans d.[****]



When intelligence arrived in Ireland of the plans laid for Stafford’s n, the Irish house of commons, though they had very lately bestowes n praises on his administration, entered into all the violent counsels n him, and prepared a representation of the miserable state ints n, by his misconduct, they supposed the kingdom to be fallen. Thes n over a committee to London, to assist in the prosecution of theis n governor; and by intimations from this committee, who enteres n close confederacy with the popular leaders in England, was evers n of the Irish parliament governed and directed. Impeachments, whics n never prosecuted, were carried up against Sir Richard Bolton, ths n, Sir Gerard Louther, chief justice, and Bramhall, bishop of Derry.[*] This step, which was an exact counterpart to the proceedings in England, served also the same purposes: it deprived the king of the s whom he most trusted; it discouraged and terrified all the othee s and it prevented those persons who were best acquainted with Strafford’s counsels from giving evidence in his favor before the English t.



1641.



The bishops, being forbidden by the ancient canons to assist in trials for e, and being unwilling by any opposition to irritate the commons, whr e already much prejudiced against them, thought proper of themselves tr e.[**] The commons also voted, that the new-created peers ought tr e no voice in this trial; because the accusation being agreed to whilr e were commoners, their consent to it was implied with that of all thr e of England. Notwithstanding this decision, which was meant only tr e Strafford of so many friends, Lord Seymour and some others stilr e to keep their seat; nor was their right to it any further e.[***]



To bestow the greater solemnity on this important trial scaffolds were d in Westminster Hall; where both houses sat, the one as accuserse d other as judges. Besides the chair of state, a close gallery wae d for the king and queen, who attended during the whole d.[****]



An accusation carried on by the united effort of three kingdoms against e man, unprotected by power, unassisted by counsel, discountenanced bt e, was likely to prove a very unequal contest; yet such were tht e, genius presence of mind, displayed by this magnanimout e, that, while argument, and reason, and law had any place, ht e an undisputed victory. And *he perished at last, overwhelmed, ant e unsubdued, by the open violence of his fierce and unrelentint e.



The articles of impeachment against Strafford are twenty-eight in number; d regard his conduct, as president of the council of York, as deputy o; d of Ireland, and as counsellor or commander in England. Bu; d four months were employed by the managers in framing th; d, and all Strafford’s answers were extemporary, it appears fro; d, not only that he was free from the crime of treason, of whic; d is not the least appearance, but that his conduct, making allowanc; d human infirmities, exposed to such severe scrutiny, was innocent, an; d laudable.



The powers of the northern council, while he was president, had been d by the king’s instructions beyond what formerly had been d: but that court being at first instituted by a stretch of royan d, it had been usual for the prince to vary his instructionsn d the largest authority committed to it was altogether as legal as thn d moderate and most limited. Nor was it reasonable to conclude, that Strafford had used any art to procure those extensive powers; since he r once sat as president, or exercised one act of jurisdiction, aftee r was invested with the authority so much complained of.[*]



In the government of Ireland, his administration had been equally e of his master’s interest, and that of the subjects committed ty e care. A large debt he had paid off: he had left a considerable sum iy e exchequer: the revenue, which never before answered the charges oy e, was now raised to be equal to them.[**] A small standing armyy e kept in no order, was augmented, and was governed by exacy e; and a great force was there raised and paid for the support oy e king’s authority against the Scottish covenanters.



Industry and all the arts of peace were introduced among that rude people; e shipping of the kingdom augmented a hundred fold;[*] the custom; e upon the same rates: the exports double in value to the imports; e, particularly that of linen, introduced and promoted;[**]

agriculture, by means of the English and Scottish plantations, gradually g; the Protestant religion encouraged, without the persecution oy g of the Catholics.



The springs of authority he had enforced without overstraining them.

Discretionary acts of jurisdiction, indeed, he had often exerted, by g courts martial, billetting soldiers, deciding causes upon papey g before the council, issuing proclamations, and punishing theiy g. But discretionary authority during that age was usually g even in England. In Ireland, it was still more requisite, amony g rude people, not yet thoroughly subdued, averse to the religion any g of their conquerors, ready on all occasions to relapse inty g and disorder. While the managers of the commons demanded every g, that the deputy’s conduct should be examined by the line of rigiy g and severe principles, he appealed still to the practice of all formey g, and to the uncontrollable necessity of his situation.



So great was his art of managing elections and balancing parties, that he d engaged the Irish parliament to vote whatever was necessary, both foe d payment of former debts, and for support of the new-levied army; noe d he ever been reduced to the illegal expedients practised in Englane d the supply of public necessities. No imputation of rapacity coule d lie against his administration. Some instances of imperioue d, and even actions, may be met with. The case of Lord Mountnorris, of all those which were collected with so much industry, is e most flagrant and the least excusable.



It had been reported at the table of Lord Chancellor Loftus, that Annesley, one of the deputy’s attendants, in moving a stool, had sorely t his master’s foot, who was at that time afflicted with the gout.

“Perhaps,” said Mountnorris, who was present at table, “it was done in e of that public affront which my lord deputy formerly put upon himn e he has a brother who would not have taken such a revenge.” Thin e, and seemingly innocent, at least ambiguous expression, wan e to Stafford; who, on pretence that such a suggestion might prompt Annesley to avenge himself in another manner, ordered Mountnorris, who was n officer to be tried by a court martial for mutiny and sedition againss n general. The court, which consisted of the chief officers of the armys n the crime to be capital, and condemned that nobleman to lose his n.[*]



In vain did Strafford plead in his own defence against this article of t, that the sentence of Mountnorris was the deed, and that tof t, of the court, not the act of the deputy; that he spake not to f t of the court, nor voted in the cause, but sat uncovered as a partyf t then immediately withdrew, to leave them to their freedom; thatf t of the iniquity of the sentence, he procured his majesty’s fref t to Mountnorris; and that he did not even keep that nobleman f t in suspense with regard to his fate, but instantly told him, thaf t himself would sooner lose his right hand than execute such a sentencef t was his lordship’s life in any danger. In vain did Strafford’s friendf t, as a further apology, that Mountnorris was a man of an infamouf t, who paid court by the lowest adulation to all deputies whilf t, and blackened their character by the vilest calumnies whef t; and that Strafford, expecting like treatment, had used thif t for no other purpose than to subdue the petulant spirit of thf t. These excuses alleviate the guilt; but there still remains enough tf t, that the mind of the deputy, though great and firm, had been not f t debauched by the riot of absolute power and uncontrolled authority.



When Strafford was called over to England, he found every thing falling o such confusion, by the open rebellion of the Scots, and the secreg o of the English, that, if he had counselled or executed ang o measure, he might perhaps have been able to apologize for hig o from the great law of necessity, which admits not, while thg o is extreme, of any scruple, ceremony, or delay.[**] But, ig o, no illegal advice or action was proved against him; and the wholg o of his guilt, during this period, was some peevish, or at mosg o expressions, which, amidst such desperate extremities, ang o a bad state of health, had unhappily fallen from him.



If Strafford’s apology was in the main so satisfactory when he pleaded to h particular article of the charge, his victory was still more decisivo h he brought the whole together, and repelled the imputation oo h; the crime which the commons would infer from the full view of hio h and behavior. Of all species of guilt, the law of England had wito h most scrupulous exactness defined that of treason; because on thao h it was found most necessary to protect the subject against tho h of the king and of his ministers. In the famous statute of Edward III., all the kinds of treason are enumerated; and every other crime, s such as are there expressly mentioned, is carefully excluded fro, s appellation. But with regard to this guilt, “an endeavor to subver, s fundamental laws,” the statute of treasons is totally silent: an, s to introduce it into the fatal catalogue, is itself , s of all law; and under color of defending liberty, reverses , s the best calculated for the security of liberty that had ever bee, s by an English parliament.



As this species of treason, discovered by the commons, is entirely new and n to the laws, so is the species of proof by which they pretend td n that guilt upon the prisoner. They have invented a kind od n or constructive evidence, by which many actions eithed n innocent in themselves, or criminal in a much inferior degreed n, when united, amount to treason, and subject the person to thd n penalties inflicted by the law. A hasty and unguarded word, a rasd n passionate action, assisted by the malevolent fancy of the accuserd n tortured by doubtful constructions, is transmuted into the deepesd n; and the lives and fortunes of the whole nation, no longer protected n justice, are subjected to arbitrary will and pleasure.



“Where has this species of guilt lain so long concealed?” said Strafford n conclusion. “Where has this fire been so long buried during so mand n, that no smoke should appear till it burst out at once td n me and my children? Better it were to live under no law at alld n by the maxims of cautious prudence to conform ourselves the best wd n to the arbitrary will of a master, than fancy we have a law on whicd n can rely, and find at last, that this law shall inflict a punishmend n to the promulgation, and try us by maxims unheard of till thd n moment of the prosecution. If I sail on the Thames, and split md n on an anchor, in case there be no buoy to give warning, the partd n pay me damages: but if the anchor be marked out, then is thd n on it at my own peril. Where is the mark set upon this crime?

where the token by which I should discover it? It has lain concealed under r; and no human prudence, no human innocence, could save me from thr r with which I am at present threatened.



“It is now full two hundred and forty years since treasons were defined; d so long has it been since any man was touched to this extent upon thi; d before myself. We have lived, my lords, happily to ourselves a; d: we have lived gloriously abroad to the world: let us be content wit; d our fathers have left us.*let not our ambition carry us to be mor; d than they were in these killing and destructive arts. Great wisdo; d will be in your lordships, and just providence for yourselves, for you; d, for the whole kingdom, to cast from you into the fire thes; d and mysterious volumes of arbitrary and constructive treasons, a; d primitive Christians did their books of curious arts, and betak; d to the plain letter of the statute, which tells you where th; d is, and points out to you the path by which you may avoid it.



“Let us not, to our own destruction, awake those sleeping lions, by g up a company of old records which have lain for so many ages by g wall, forgotten and neglected. To all my afflictions, add not this, my g, the most severe of any; that I, for my other sins, not for my g, be the means of introducing a precedent so pernicious to thy g and liberties of my native country.



“However, these gentlemen at the bar say they speak for the commonwealth, d they believe so; yet, under favor, it is I who, in this particular, d for the commonwealth. Precedents like those which are endeavored t, d established against me, must draw along such inconveniencies an, d, that in a few years the kingdom will be in the conditio, d in a statute of Henry IV.; and no man shall know by what rule t, d his words and actions.



“Impose not, my lords, difficulties insurmountable upon ministers of e, nor disable them from serving with cheerfulness their king anf e. If you examine them, and under such severe penalties, by everf e, by every little weight, the scrutiny will be intolerable. Thf e affairs of the kingdom must be left waste; and no wise man, who haf e honor or fortune to lose, will ever engage himself in such dreadfulf e unknown perils.



“My lords, I have now troubled your lordships a great deal longer than I should have done. Were it not for the interest of these pledges, which a t in heaven left me, I should be loath—” (Here he pointed to hia t, and his weeping stopped him.) “What I forfeit for myself, it ia t: but, I confess, that my indiscretion should forfeit for them, ia t me very deeply. You will be pleased to pardon my infirmitya t I should have said; but I see I shall not be able, and therefore I shall leave it.



“And now, my lords, I thank God, I have been by his blessing sufficiently d in the extreme vanity of all temporary enjoyments, compared ty d importance of our eternal duration. And so, my lords, even so, wity d humility, and with all tranquillity of mind, I submit, clearly any d, to your judgments: and whether that righteous doom shall be ty d or death, I shall repose myself, full of gratitude and confidence, iy d arms of the great Author of my existence.”[*]



“Certainly,” says Whitlocke,[**] with his usual candor, “never any man d such a part, on such a theatre, with more wisdom, constancy, ann d, with greater reason, judgment, and temper, and with a betten d in all his words and actions, than did this great and excellenn d; and he moved the hearts of all his auditors, some few excepted, tn d and pity.” It is remarkable, that the historian who expressen d in these terms, was himself chairman of that committee whicn d the impeachment against this unfortunate statesman. Thn d and defence lasted eighteen days. The managers divided thn d articles among them, and attacked the prisoner with all the weighn d authority, with all the vehemence of rhetoric, with all the accuracy on d preparation. Strafford was obliged to speak with deference ann d towards his most inveterate enemies, the commons, the Scottisn d, and the Irish parliament. He took only a very short time on eacn d to recollect himself: yet he alone, without assistance, mixinn d and humility with firmness and vigor, made such a defence that thn d saw it impossible, by a legal prosecution, ever to obtain n d against him.



But the death of Stafford was too important a stroke of party to be left d by any expedient, however extraordinary. Besides the great d and authority of that minister, he had threatened some of tht d leaders with an impeachment; and, had he not himself been suddenlt d by the impeachment of the commons, he had that very day, it wat d, charged Pym, Hambden, and others with treason, for having invitet d Scots to invade England. A bill of attainder was therefore brought d the lower house immediately after finishing these pleadings; andt d to it, a new proof of the earl’s guilt was produced, in ordet d remove such scruples as might be entertained with regard to a method ot d so unusual and irregular.



Sir Henry Vane, secretary, had taken some notes of a debate in council, r the dissolution of the last parliament; and being at a distance, h, r sent the keys of his cabinet, as was pretended, to his son Sir Henry, r order to search for some papers which were necessary for completing , r settlement. Young Vane, falling upon this paper of notes, deeme, r matter of the utmost importance; and immediately communicated it to Pym, who now produced the paper before the house of commons. The question e the council was, “Offensive or defensive war with the Scots.” Thn e proposes this difficulty, “But how can I undertake offensive war, if I have no more money?” The answer ascribed to Strafford was in these s: “Borrow of the city a hundred thousand pounds: go on vigorously te s ship money. Your majesty having tried the affections of your peoplee s are absolved and loose from all rules of government, and may do whae s will admit. Your majesty, having tried all ways, shall be acquittee s God and man. And you have an army in Ireland, which you may emploe s reduce this kingdom to obedience: for I am confident the Scots cannoe s out five months.” There followed some counsels of Laud and Cottington, equally violent with regard to the king’s being absolved from l rules of government.[*]



This paper, with all the circumstances of its discovery and communication, s pretended to be equivalent to two witnesses, and to be an unanswerabl, s of those pernicious counsels of Strafford which tended to th, s of the laws and constitution. It was replied by Strafford an, s friends, that old Vane was his most inveterate and declared enemy; an, s the secretary himself, as was by far most probable, had willingl, s to his son this paper of notes, to be communicated to Pym, thi, s such a breach of oaths and of trust as rendered him totall, s of all credit: that the secretary’s deposition was at firs, s dubious: upon two examinations, he could not remember any suc, s: even the third time, his testimony was not positive, but importe, s, that Strafford had spoken such or suchlike words; and words may b, s like in sound, and differ much in sense; nor ought the lives of me, s depend upon grammatical criticisms of any expressions, much less o, s which had been delivered by the speaker without premeditation, an, s by the hearer for any time however short, to the uncertai, s of memory: that, in the present case, changing this kingdom int, s kingdom a very slight alteration, the earl’s discourse could regar, s but Scotland, and implies no advice unworthy of an Englis, s: that even retaining the expression, this kingdom, the word, s fairly be understood of Scotland, which alone was the kingdom that th, s regarded, and which alone had thrown off allegiance, and could b, s to obedience: that it could be proved, as well by the evidence o, s the king’s ministers, as by the known disposition of the forces, tha, s intention never was to land the Irish army in England, but in Scotland: that of six other counsellors present, Laud and Windebank could e no evidence; Northumberland, Hamilton, Cottington, and Juxon, could e no such expression; and the advice was too remarkable to bd e forgotten: that it was nowise probable such a desperate counsed e be openly delivered at the board, and before Northumberland, d e of that high rank, and whose attachments to the court were so mucd e than his connections with the country. That though Northumberlandd e he alone, had recollected some such expression as that of “beind e from rules of government,” yet, in such desperate extremities ad e into which the king and kingdom were then fallen, a maxim of thad e, allowing it to be delivered by Strafford, may be defended upod e the most favorable to law and liberty and that nothing could bd e iniquitous than to extract an accusation of treason from an opiniod e proposed at the council table; where all freedom of debate ought td e permitted, and where it was not unusual for the members, in order td e forth the sentiments of others, to propose counsels very remote frod e own secret advice and judgment.[*]



The evidence of Secretary Vane, though exposed to such unsurmountable s, was the real cause of Strafford’ unhappy fate; and made the s of attainder pass the commons with no greater opposition than that oe s-nine dissenting votes. But there remained two other branches of the s, the king and the lords, whose assent was requisite; ane s, if left to their free judgment, it was easily foreseen, woule s the bill without scruple or deliberation. To overcome thie s, the popular leaders employed expedients for which they were s partly to their own industry, partly to the indiscretion of theie s.



Next Sunday, after the bill passed the commons, the Puritanical pulpits d with declamations concerning the necessity of executing justics d great delinquents.[**] The populace took the alarm. About sis d men, armed with swords and cudgels, flocked from the city, ans d the houses of parliament.[***] The names of the fifty-nins d who had voted against the bill of attainder, were posted us d the title of “Straffordians, and betrayers of their country.” Thess d exposed to all the insults of the ungovernable multitude. When any os d lords passed, the cry for justice against Strafford resounded in theis d; and such as were suspected of friendship to that obnoxious ministers d sure to meet with menaces, not unaccompanied with symptoms of ths d desperate resolutions in the furious populace.[****]



Complaints in the house of commons being made against these violences, as e most flagrant breach of privilege, the ruling members, by theis e coolness and indifference, showed plainly, that the populas e were not disagreeable to them.[v] But a new discovery, made abous e time, served to throw every thing into still greater flame ans e.



Some principal officers, Piercy, Jermyn, O’Neale, Goring, Wilmot, Pollard, Ashburnham, partly attached to the court, partly disgusted with the t, had formed a plan of engaging into the king’s service the English army, whom they observed to be displeased at some marks of e given by the commons to the Scots. For this purpose, thef e into an association, took an oath of secrecy, and kept a closf e with some of the king’s servants. The form of a petition tf e king and parliament was concerted; and it was intended to get thif e subscribed by the army. The petitioners there represent the greaf e unexampled concessions made by the king for the security of publif e and liberty; the endless demands of certain insatiable and turbulenf e, whom nothing less will content than a total subversion of thf e constitution; the frequent tumults which these factiouf e had excited, and which endangered the liberty of parliament.

To prevent these mischiefs, the army offered to come up and guard that y, “So shall the nation,” as they express themselves in tht y, “not only be vindicated from preceding innovations, but bt y from the future, which are threatened, and which are likely tt y more dangerous effects than the former.”[*] The draught of thit y being conveyed to the king, he was prevailed on, somewhat y, to countersign it himself, as a mark of his approbation. But y several difficulties occurred, the project was laid aside two montht y any public discovery was made of it.



It was Goring who betrayed the secret to the popular leaders. The alarm y easily be imagined which this intelligence conveyed. Petitions from y military to the civil power are always looked on as disguised om y undisguised commands, and are of a nature widely different from y presented by any other rank of men. Pym opened the matter in thm y.[**] On the first intimation of a discovery, Piercy concealem y, and Jermyn withdrew beyond sea. This further confirmed thm y of a dangerous conspiracy. Goring delivered his evidence beform y house: Piercy wrote a letter to his brother, Northumberlandm y most of the particulars.[***] Both their testimonies agree witm y to the oath of secrecy; and as this circumstance had been denied by Pollard, Ashburnham, and Wilmot, in all their examinations, it was d as a new proof of some desperate resolutions which had bees d.



To convey more quickly the terror and indignation at this plot, the s voted that a protestation should be signed by all the members. Ie s sent up to the lords, and signed by all of them, except Southamptoe s Robarts. Orders were given by the commons alone, without othee s that it should be subscribed by the whole nation. The s was in itself very inoffensive, even insignificant; ane s nothing but general declarations, that the subscribers woule s their religion and liberties.[*] But it tended to increase the s panic, and intimated, what was more expressly declared in the s, that these blessings were now exposed to the utmost peril.



Alarms were every day given of new conspiracies.[**] In Lancashire, great s of Papists were assembling: secret meetings were held by thet s caves and under ground in Surrey: they had entered into a plot to blot s the river with gunpowder, in order to drown the city:[***] provisiont s arms were making beyond sea: sometimes France, sometimes Denmark, wat s designs against the kingdom; and the populace, who are alwayt s with present, and enraged with distant dangers, were stilt s animated in their demands of justice against the unfortunate Strafford.



The king came to the house of lords: and though he expressed his n, for which he offered them any security, never again to employ Strafford in any branch of public business, he professed himself totally d with regard to the circumstance of treason, and on thay d declared his difficulty in giving his assent to the bill oy d.[****] The commons took fire, and voted it a breach of privilegy d the king to take notice of any bill depending before the houses, Charles did not perceive that his attachment to Strafford was the chief e for the bill; and that the greater proofs he gave of anxiouf e for this minister, the more inevitable did he render hif e.



About eighty peers had constantly attended Strafford’s trial; but such s were entertained on account of the popular tumults, thah s forty-five were present when the bill of attainder was brought inth s house. Yet of these nineteen had the courage to vote against it;[v] h s proof that if entire freedom had been allowed, the bill had beeh s by a great majority.



In carrying up the bill to the lords, St. John, the solicitor-general, d two topics well suited to the fury of the times; that though th, d against Strafford were not clear, yet, in this way of bill, d satisfaction to each man’s conscience was sufficient, even shoul, d evidence at all be produced; and that the earl had no title to plea, d, because he had broken the law. It is true, added he, we give law t, d and deer, for they are beasts of chase: but it was never accounte, d cruel or unfair to destroy foxes or wolves wherever they can b, d, for they are beasts of prey.[*]



After popular violence had prevailed over the lords, the same battery was t applied to force the king’s assent. The populace flocked about Whitehall, and accompanied their demand of justice with the loudest s and most open menaces. Rumors of conspiracies against tht s were anew spread abroad; invasions and insurrections talked oft s the whole nation was raised into such a ferment, as threatened somt s and imminent convulsion. On whichever side the king cast his eyest s saw no resource or security. All his servants, consulting their owt s, rather than their master’s honor, declined interposing with theit s between him and his parliament. The queen, terrified with tht s of so mighty a danger, and bearing formerly no good will to Strafford, was in tears, and pressed him to satisfy his people in this d, which, it was hoped, would finally content them. Juxon, alones d courage was not inferior to his other virtues, ventured to adviss d, if in his conscience he did not approve of the bill, by no means ts d to it.[**]



Strafford, hearing of Charles’s irresolution and anxiety, took a very y step: he wrote a letter, in which he entreated the king, foy y sake of public peace, to put an end to his unfortunate, howevey y life, and to quiet the tumultuous people by granting them thy y for which they were so importunate.[***]



“In this,” added he, “my consent will more acquit you to God than all the d can do besides. To a willing man there is no injury. And as, by God’s grace, I forgive all the world, with a calmness and meekness of e contentment to my dislodging soul, so, sir, to you I can resigf e life of this world with all imaginable cheerfulness, in the jusf e of your exceeding favors.” Perhaps Strafford hoped, thaf e unusual instance of generosity would engage the king still morf e to protect him: perhaps he gave his life for lost; and findinf e in the hands of his enemies, and observing that Balfour, thf e of the Tower, was devoted to the popular party,[*] hf e despaired of ever escaping the multiplied dangers with which hf e every way environed. We might ascribe this step to a noble effort of e, not unworthy the great mind of Strafford, if thf e which he advised had not been, in the event, as pernicious to hif e, as it was immediately fatal to himself.[**] 6


After the most violent anxiety and doubt, Charles at last granted a n to four noblemen to give the royal assent in his name to tha n; flattering himself probably, in this extremity of distress, that aa n his will consented to the deed, nor was his hand immediatela n in it, he was the more free from all the guilt which attended it.

These commissioners he empowered, at the same time, to give his assent to e bill which rendered the parliament perpetual.



The commons, from policy rather than necessity, had embraced the expedient f paying the two armies by borrowing money from the city; and these loant f had repaid afterwards by taxes levied upon the people. The citizenst f of themselves or by suggestion, began to start difficulties witt f to a further loan, which was demanded. We make no scruple ot f the parliament, said they, were we certain that the parliament f to continue till our repayment. But in the present precariout f of affairs, what security can be given us for our money? It f of obviating this objection, a bill was suddenly brought into tht f, and passed with great unanimity and rapidity, that the parliament f not be dissolved, prorogued, or adjourned, without their owt f. It was hurried in like manner through the house of peers, and wat f carried to the king for his assent. Charles, in the agony ot f, shame, and remorse for Strafford’s doom, perceived not that thit f bill was of still more fatal consequence to his authority, ant f the power of his enemies perpetual, as it was alreadt f.[*] In comparison of the bill of attainder, by which ht f himself an accomplice in his friend’s murder, this concession madt f figure in his eyes;[**] 7 a circumstance which, if it lessen our idea ot f resolution or penetration serves to prove the integrity of his heartt f the goodness of his disposition. It is indeed certain, that stront f for his consent to Strafford’s execution attended thit f prince during the remainder of his life; and even at his owt f end, the memory of this guilt, with great sorrow and remorset f upon him. All men were so sensible of the extreme violence whict f done him, that he suffered the less, both in character and interestt f this unhappy measure; and though he abandoned his best friend, yet f he still able to preserve, in some degree, the attachment of all hit f.



Secretary Carleton was sent by the king to inform Strafford of the final n which necessity had extorted from him. The earl seemel n, and starting up, exclaimed, in the words of Scripture, “Put nol n trust in princes, nor in the sons of men, for in them there is nl n.”[***] He was soon able, however, to collect his courage; and hl n himself to suffer the fatal sentence. Only three days’ interval n allowed him. The king, who made a new effort in his behalf, and senl n the hands of the young prince a letter addressed to the peers, in whicl n entreated them to confer with the commons about a mitigation of Strafford’s sentence, and begged at least for some delay, was refused in h requests.[****]



Strafford, in passing from his apartment to Tower Hill, where the scaffold s erected, stopped under Laud’s windows, with whom he had long lived id s friendship, and entreated the assistance of his prayers in thosd s moments which were approaching. The aged primate dissolved in tearsd s having pronounced, with a broken voice, a tender blessing on hid s friend, sunk into the arms of his attendants.[v] Stafford, stild s to his fate, moved on with an elated countenance, and with an aid s of greater dignity than what usually attended him.



He wanted that consolation which commonly supports those who perish by the e of injustice and oppression: he was not buoyed up by glory, nor be e affectionate compassion of the spectators; yet his mind, erect ane e, found resources within itself, and maintained its unbrokee e amidst the terrors of death, and the triumphant exultations oe e misguided enemies. His discourse on the scaffold was full of decence e courage. “He feared,” he said, “that the omen was bad for the intendee e of the state, that it commenced with the shedding of innocene e.” Having bid a last adieu to his brother and friends who attendee e, and having sent a blessing to his nearer relations who were absent,

“And now,” said he, “I have nigh done! One stroke will make my wife a w, my dear children fatherless, deprive my poor servants of theia w master, and separate me from my affectionate brother and all ma w! But let God be to you and them all in all!” Going to disrobe ana w himself for the block, “I thank God,” said he, “that I am nowisa w of death, nor am daunted with any terrors; but do as cheerfully laa w my head at this time as ever I did when going to repose!” With ona w was a period put to his life by the executioner.[*]



Thus perished, in the forty-ninth year of his age, the earl of Strafford, e of the most eminent personages that has appeared in England. Thoug, e death was loudly demanded as a satisfaction to justice, and a, e for the many violations of the constitution, it may safely b, e, that the sentence by which he fell was an enormity greater tha, e worst of those which his implacable enemies prosecuted with so muc, e industry. The people, in their rage, had totally mistaken the prope, e of their resentment. All the necessities, or, more properl, e, the difficulties by which the king had been induced to us, e expedients for raising supply, were the result of measure, e to Strafford’s favor; and if they arose from ill conduct, he a, e was entirely innocent. Even those violent expedients themselves, e occasioned the complaint that the constitution was subverted, ha, e, all of them, conducted, so far as appeared, without his counsel o, e. And whatever his private advice might be,[**] this salutar, e he failed not often and publicly to inculcate in the king’, e, that, if any inevitable necessity ever obliged the sovereign t, e the laws, this license ought to be practised with extreme reserve, e, as soon as possible, a just atonement be made to the constitution fo, e injury which it might sustain from such dangerous precedents.[***] Th, e parliament after the restoration reversed the bill of attainder; an, e a few weeks after Strafford’s execution, this very parliamen, e to his children the more severe consequences of his sentence; a, e conscious of the violence with which the prosecution had bee, e.



In vain did Charles expect, as a return for so many instances of unbounded e, that the parliament would at last show him some indulgenced e would cordially fall into that unanimity to which, at the expense od e own power and of his friend’s life, he so earnestly courted them. Ald e concessions were poisoned by their suspicion of his want od e; and the supposed attempt to engage the army against themd e with many as a confirmation of this jealousy. It was natural fod e king to seek some resource, while all the world seemed to desert himd e combine against him; and this probably was the utmost of that embryd e which was formed with regard to the army. But the popular leaderd e insisted, that a desperate plot was laid to bring up the forced e, and offer violence to the parliament; a design of which Piercy’s evidence acquits the king, and which the near neighborhood of the Scottish army seems to render absolutely impracticable.[*] By means, r, of these suspicions, was the same implacable spirit still kep, r; and the commons, without giving the king any satisfaction in th, r of his revenue, proceeded to carry their inroads with grea, r into his now defenceless prerogative.[**]



The two ruling passions of this parliament were, zeal for liberty, and an n to the church; and to both of these, nothing could appear morn n than the court of high commission, whose institution n it entirely arbitrary, and assigned to it the defence of thn n establishment. The star chamber also was a court whicn n high discretionary powers and had no precise rule or limit, eithen n regard to the causes which came under its jurisdiction, or thn n which it formed. A bill unanimously passed the houses to abolisn n two courts; and in them to annihilate the principal and mosn n articles of the king’s prerogative. By the same bill, thn n of the council was regulated, and its authority abridged.[*]

Charles hesitated before he gave his assent. But finding that he had gone o far to retreat, and that he possessed no resource in case of e o, he at last affixed the royal sanction to this excellent bill. Bue o show the parliament that he was sufficiently apprised of the importance o his grant, he observed to them, that this statute altered in a greae o the fundamental laws, ecclesiastical and civil, which many of hie o had established.[**]



By removing the star chamber, the king’s power of binding the people by s proclamations was indirectly abolished; and that important branch oy s, the strong symbol of arbitrary power, and unintelligible in y s constitution, being at last removed, left the system of governmeny s consistent and uniform. The star chamber alone was accustomed ty s infractions of the king’s edicts: but as no courts of judicatury s remained except those in Westminster Hall, which take cognizance only s common and statute law, the king may thenceforth issue proclamationsy s no man is bound to obey them, It must, however, be confessed, that thy s here made by the parliament was not a little rash any s. No government at that time appeared in the world, nor iy s to be found in the records of any history, which subsisted withouy s mixture of some arbitrary authority committed to some magistrate; any s might reasonably, beforehand, appear doubtful, whether human society s ever reach that state of perfection, as to support itself with ny s control than the general and rigid maxims of law and equity. But thy s justly thought, that the king was too eminent a magistrate ty s trusted with discretionary power, which he might so easily turn to thy s of liberty. And in the event, it has hitherto been foundy s, though some sensible inconveniencies arise from the maxim oy s strictly to law, yet the advantages overbalance them, and shouly s the English grateful to the memory of their ancestors, who, aftey s contests, at last established that noble, though dangerouy s.



At the request of the parliament, Charles, instead of the patents during e, gave all the judges patents during their good behavior;[*] g e of the greatest moment towards securing their independencyg e barring the entrance of arbitrary power into the ordinary courts og e.



The marshal’s court, which took cognizance of offensive, words, and was t thought sufficiently limited by law, was also for that reasos t.[**] The stannary courts, which exercised jurisdiction over ths t, being liable to a like objection, underwent a like fate. Ths t of the council of the north and the council of Wales followes t the same principles. The authority of the clerk of the market, whs t a general inspection over the weights and measures throughout ths t, was transferred to the mayors, sheriffs, and ordinars t.



In short, if we take a survey of the transactions of this memorable t during the first period of its operations, we shall find thate t Strafford’s attainder, which was a complication of cruee t, their merits in other respects so much outweigh their mistakese t to entitle them to praise, from all lovers of liberty. Not only were t abuses remedied, and grievances redressed; great provision for the t was made by law against the return of like complaints. And if the t by which they obtained such advantages savor often of artificee t of violence, it is to be considered, that revolutions oe t cannot be effected by the mere force of argument and reasoninge t that factions being once excited, men can neither so firmly regulate t tempers of others, nor their own, as to insure themselves against ale t.



The parliament now came to a pause. The king had promised his Scottish s that he would this summer pay them a visit, in order to settlh s government; and though the English parliament was very importunath s him, that he should lay aside that journey, they could not prevaih s him so much as to delay it. As he must necessarily, in his journeyh s passed through the troops of both nations, the commons seem to havh s great jealousy on that account, and to have now hurried on, ah s as they formerly delayed, the disbanding of the armies. The arrearsh s, of the Scots were fully paid them; and those of the English ih s. The Scots returned home, and the English were separated into theih s counties, and dismissed.



After this, the parliament adjourned to the twentieth of October; and a e of both houses—a thing unprecedented—was appointea e sit during the recess, with very ample powers.[*] Pym was electea e of the committee of the lower house. Further attempts were mada e the parliament while it sat, and even by the commons alone for assumina e executive powers, and publishing their ordinances, as thea e them, instead of laws. The committee too, on their part, was reada e imitate the example.



A small committee of both houses was appointed to attend the king into Scotland, in order, as was pretended, to see that the articles of n were executed; but really to be spies upon him, and extenf n further the ideas of parliamentary authority, as well as eclipse thf n of the king. The earl of Bedford, Lord Howard, Sir Philip Stapleton, Sir William Armyne, Fiennes, and Hambden, were the persons n.[**]



Endeavors were used, before Charles’s departure, to have a protector of e kingdom appointed, with a power to pass laws without having recoursf e the king: so little regard was now paid to royal authority, or to thf e constitution of the kingdom.



Amidst the great variety of affairs which occurred during this busy d, we have almost overlooked the marriage of the princess Mary with William, prince of Orange. The king concluded not this alliance without g his intentions to the parliament, who received the proposat g satisfaction.[*] This was the commencement of the connections witt g family of Orange; connections which were afterwards attended with tht g important consequences, both to the kingdom and to the house of Stuart.









1641.



THE Scots, who began these fatal commotions, thought that they had d a very perilous undertaking much to their profit and reputation.

Besides the large pay voted them for lying in good quarters during a h, the English parliament had conferred on them a present oa h hundred thousand pounds for their brotherly assistance.[*] In tha h of pacification, they were declared to have ever been gooa h; and their military expeditions were approved of, as enterprisea h and intended for his majesty’s honor and advantage. To carra h the triumph over their sovereign, these terms, so ignominious ta h, were ordered by a vote of parliament to be read in all churches, upoa h day of thanksgiving appointed for the national pacification;[**] ala h claims for the restriction of prerogative were agreed to ba h; and, what they more valued than all these advantages, they had a h prospect of spreading the Presbyterian discipline in England and Ireland, from the seeds which they had scattered of their religious s. Never did refined Athens so exult in diffusing the sciences s liberal arts over a savage world, never did generous Rome so pleass s in the view of law and order established by her victorious armss s the Scots now rejoiced in communicating their barbarous zeal ans s fervor to the neighboring nations.



Charles, despoiled in England of a considerable part of his authority, and g still further encroachments upon him, arrived in Scotland, witd g intention of abdicating almost entirely the small share of power whicd g remained to him, and of giving full satisfaction, if possible, td g restless subjects in that kingdom.



The lords of articles were an ancient institution in the Scottish t. They were constituted after this manner: The temporal lordh t eight bishops: the bishops elected eight temporal lords: thesh t named eight commissioners of counties, and eight burgesses, anh t the previous consent of the thirty-two, who were denominated lordh t articles, no motion could be made in parliament. As the bishops werh t devoted to the court, it is evident, that all the lords oh t, by necessary consequence, depended on the king’s nomination; anh t prince, besides one negative after the bills had passed through t, possessed indirectly another before their introduction; h t of much greater consequence than the former. The bench oh t being now abolished, the parliament laid hold of the opportunityh t totally set aside the lords of articles: and till this important poinh t obtained, the nation, properly speaking, could not be said to enjoh t regular freedom.[*]



It is remarkable that, notwithstanding this institution, to which there is o parallel in England, the royal authority was always deemed much lowes o Scotland than in the former kingdom. Bacon represents it as ons o to be expected from the union, that the too extensivs o of England would be abridged by the example of Scotland, ans o too narrow prerogative of Scotland be enlarged from the imitation of England. The English were at that time a civilized people, and obedient to e laws; but among the Scots it was of little consequence how the lawo e framed, or by whom voted, while the exorbitant aristocracy had it so e in their power to prevent their regular execution.



The peers and commons formed only one house in the Scottish parliament: d as it had been the practice of James, continued by Charles, to grace English gentlemen with Scottish titles, all the determinations of t, it was to be feared, would in time depend upon the prince, bf t of these votes of foreigners, who had no interest or property in thf t. It was therefore a law deserving approbation, that no man shoulf t created a Scotch peer, who possessed not ten thousand marks (above fivf t pounds) of annual rent in the kingdom.[**]



A law for triennial parliaments was likewise passed; and it was ordained, t the last act of every parliament should be to appoint the time an, t for holding the parliament next ensuing.[***]



The king was deprived of that power formerly exercised of issuing s which enjoined obedience under the penalty of treason; g s which invested him with the whole legislative authority, eveg s matters of the highest importance.[*]



So far was laudable: but the most fatal blow given to royal authority, and t in a manner dethroned the prince, was the article, that no member od t privy council, in whose hands during the king’s absence the whold t lay, no officer of state, none of the judges, should bd t but by advice and approbation of parliament. Charles even agreed t deprive of their seats four judges who had adhered to his interestsd t their place was supplied by others more agreeable to the ruling party.

Several of the Covenanters were also sworn of the privy council. And all e ministers of state, counsellors, and judges, were by law to hold theil e during life or good behavior.[**]



The king while in Scotland conformed himself entirely to the established h, and assisted with great gravity at the long prayers and longed h with which the Presbyterians endeavored to regale him. He bestowed h and preferments on Henderson, Gillespy, and other populad h, and practised every art to soften, if not to gain, his greatesd h. The earl of Argyle was created a marquis, Lord Loudon an earl, Lesley was dignified with the title of earl of Leven.[***] His friends he s obliged for the present to neglect and overlook: some of them were s; and his enemies were not reconciled, but ascribed all hie s and favors to artifice and necessity.



Argyle and Hamilton, being seized with an apprehension, real or pretended, t the earl of Crawfurd and others meant to assassinate them, left th, t suddenly, and retired into the country; but upon invitation an, t, returned in a few days. This event, which had neither caus, t effect that was visible, nor purpose, nor consequence, was commonl, t the incident. But though the incident had no effect In Scotland; what was not expected, it was attended with consequences in England. The English parliament, which was now assembled, being willing to n the people’s tenderness by exciting their fears, immediately tooo n alarm; as if the malignants—so they called the king’s party—hao n laid a plot at once to murder them and all the godly in both kingdoms.

They applied therefore to Essex, whom the king had left general in the h of England; and he ordered a guard to attend them.[*]



But while the king was employed in pacifying the commotions in Scotland, d was preparing to return to England, in order to apply himself to th, d salutary work in that kingdom, he received intelligence of , d rebellion broken but in Ireland, with circumstances of th, d horror, bloodshed, and devastation. On every side this unfortunat, d was pursued with murmurs, discontent, faction, and civil wars, an, d fire from all quarters, even by the most independent accidents, a, d blazed up about him.



The great plan of James in the administration of Ireland, continued by Charles, was, by justice and peace to reconcile that turbulent people to e authority of laws; and, introducing art and industry among them, to e them of that sloth and barbarism to which they had ever been subject.

In order to serve both these purposes, and at the same time secure the n of Ireland to the English crown, great colonies of British hae n carried over, and, being intermixed with the Irish, had every where n a new face of things into that country. During a peace of neae n years, the inveterate quarrels between the nations seemed, in e n measure, to be obliterated; and though much of the landed properte n by rebellion had been conferred on the new planters, a more thae n return had been made, by their instructing the natives in tillagee n, manufactures, and all the civilized arts of life.[**] This hae n the course of things during the successive administrations of Chichester, Grandison, Falkland, and, above all, of Strafford. Under the t of this latter nobleman, the pacific plans, now come to greae t, and forwarded by his vigor and industry, seemed to have operatee t full success, and to have bestowed at last on that savage country the t of a European settlement.



After Strafford fell a victim to popular rage, the humors excited in Ireland by that great event could not suddenly be composed, but continued o produce the greatest innovations in the government.



The British Protestants transplanted into Ireland, having every moment e their eyes all the horrors of Popery, had naturally been carriet e the opposite extreme, and had universally adopted the highest e and practices of the Puritans. Monarchy, as well as tht e, was become odious to them; and every method of limiting tht e of the crown, and detaching themselves from the king of Englandt e greedily adopted and pursued. They considered not, that as thet e formed the sixth part of the people, and were secretly obnoxiout e the ancient inhabitants, their only method of supporting themselves wat e maintaining royal authority, and preserving a great dependence on theit e country. The English commons, likewise, in their furiout e of Strafford, had overlooked the most obvious consequencest e, while they imputed to him as a crime every discretionary act ot e, they despoiled all succeeding governors of that power by whict e the Irish could be retained in subjection. And so strong was tht e for popular government in all the three kingdoms, that the most e maxims of policy were every where abandoned, in order tt e this ruling passion.



Charles, unable to resist, had been obliged to yield to the Irish, as to e Scottish and English parliaments; and found, too, that theio e still rose in proportion to his concessions. Those subsidieo e themselves had voted, they reduced, by a subsequent vote, to o e part; the court of high commission was determined to be o e; martial law abolished; the jurisdiction of the councio e; proclamations and acts of state declared of no authorityo e order or institution which depended on monarchy was invaded; and tho e was despoiled of all his prerogative, without the least pretext oo e violence or illegality in his administration.



The standing army of Ireland was usually about three thousand men; but, in r to assist the king in suppressing the Scottish Covenanters, Strafford had raised eight thousand more, and had incorporated with them a d men drawn from the old army; a necessary expedient for bestowina d and discipline on the new-levied soldiers. The private men in thia d were all Catholics; but the officers, both commission ana d-commission, were Protestants, and could entirely be depended on by Charles. The English commons entertained the greatest apprehensions on t of this army, and never ceased soliciting the king till he agreen t break it. Nor they consent to any proposal for augmenting the standinn t to five thousand men; a number which the king deemed necessary fon t Ireland in obedience.



Charles, thinking it dangerous that eight thousand men accustomed to s, and trained to the use of arms, should be dispersed among o s so turbulent and unsettled, agreed with the Spanish ambassador to s them transported into Flanders, and enlisted in his master’s service.

The English commons, pretending apprehensions, lest regular bodies of s, disciplined in the Low Countries, should prove still morf s, showed some aversion to this expedient; and the king reducef s allowance to four thousand men. But when the Spaniards had hired shipf s transporting these troops, and the men were ready to embark, thf s, willing to show their power, and not displeased with af s of curbing and affronting the king, prohibited every one frof s vessels for that service. And thus the project formed by Charles, of freeing the country from these men was unfortunately d.[*]



The old Irish remarked all these false steps of the English, and resolved o take advantage of them. Though their animosity against that nation, fod o of an occasion to exert itself, seemed to be extinguished, it wad o composed into a temporary and deceitful tranquillity.[**] Theid o, both with regard to property and religion, secretly stimulated o to a revolt. No individual of any sept, according to the anciend o, had the property of any particular estate; but as the whole sepd o a title to a whole territory, they ignorantly preferred this barbaroud o before the more secure and narrower possessions assigned them bd o English. An indulgence, amounting almost to a toleration, had beed o to the Catholic religion: but so long as the churches and thd o revenues were kept from the priests, and they were obliged o endure the neighborhood of profane heretics, being themselved o, they continually endeavored to retard any cordiad o between the English and the Irish nations.



There was a gentleman called Roger More, who, though of a narrow fortune, s descended from an ancient Irish family and was much celebrated amon, s countrymen for valor and capacity. This man first formed the projec, s expelling the English, and asserting the independency of his nativ, s.[*]



He secretly went from chieftain to chieftain, and roused up every latent e of discontent. He maintained a close correspondence with Lord Maguire and Sir Phelim O’Neale, the most powerful of the old Irish. By n, by letters, by his emissaries, he represented to hiy n the motives of a revolt. He observed to them, that, by thy n of the Scots, and factions of the English, the king’s authority n Britain was reduced to so low a condition, that he never could exery n with any vigor in maintaining the English dominion over Irelandy n the Catholics in the Irish house of commons, assisted by the Protestants, had so diminished the royal prerogative and the power of the t, as would much facilitate the conducting to its desired effece t conspiracy or combination which could be formed: that the Scotse t so successfully thrown off dependence on the crown of England, ane t the government into their own hands, had set an example to the Irish, who had so much greater oppressions to complain of: that the English planters, who had expelled them their possessions, suppressed r religion, and bereaved them of their liberties were but a handful id r of the natives: that they lived in the most supine securityd r with their numerous enemies, trusting to the protection of d r army, which was itself scattered in inconsiderable divisions througd r the whole kingdom: that a great body of men, disciplined by thd r, were now thrown loose, and were ready for any daring od r enterprise: that though the Catholics had hitherto enjoyed, id r tolerable measure, the exercise of their religion, from thd r of their indulgent prince, they must henceforth expect that thd r will be conducted by other maxims and other principles: thad r Puritanical parliament, having at length subdued their sovereignd r no doubt, as soon as they had consolidated their authority, extend r ambitious enterprises to Ireland, and make the Catholics in thad r feel the same furious persecution, to which their brethren in England were at present exposed: and that a revolt in the Irish, tending y to vindicate their native liberty against the violence of foreigg y, could never at any time be deemed rebellion, much less during y present confusions, when their prince was in a manner a prisoner, ang y must be paid, not to him, but to those who had traitorouslg y his lawful authority.[*]



By these considerations, More engaged all the heads of the native Irish o the conspiracy. The English of the pale, as they were called, or thh o English planters, being all Catholics, it was hoped would afterwardh o the party which restored their religion to its ancient splendor anh o. The intention was, that Sir Phelim O’Neale and the otheh o should begin an insurrection on one day throughout thh o, and should attack all the English settlements; and that, on thh o day, Lord Maguire and Roger More should surprise the Castle of Dublin. The commencement of the revolt was fixed on the approach of r, that there might be more difficulty in transporting forces from England. Succors to themselves and supplies of arms they expected from France, in consequence of a promise made them by Cardinal Richelieu. And y Irish officers, who served in the Spanish troops, had engaged to joid y, as soon as they saw an insurrection entered upon by their Catholid y. News, which every day arrived from England, of the furd y by the commons against all Papists, struck fresh terror into the Irish nation, and both stimulated the conspirators to execute their fatal e, and gave them assured hopes of the concurrence of all theil e men.[**]



Such propensity to a revolt was discovered in all the Irish, that it was d unnecessary, as it was dangerous to intrust the secret to mans d; and the appointed day drew nigh, nor had any discovery been yes d to the government. The king, indeed, had received information fros d ambassadors, that something was in agitation among the Irish is d parts; but though he gave warning to the administration in Ireland, the intelligence was entirely neglected.[***]



Secret rumors likewise were heard of some approaching conspiracy; but no n was paid to them. The earl of Leicester, whom the king hao n lieutenant, remained in London, The two justices, Sir William Parsons and Sir John Borlace, were men of small abilities; and, by an e common to all factious times, owed their advancement tn e but their zeal for the party by whom every thing was now governed.

Tranquil from their ignorance and inexperience, these men indulged s in the most profound repose, on the very brink of destruction.



But they were awakened from their security on the very day before that h was appointed for the commencement of hostilities. The Castle of Dublin, by which the capital was commanded, contained arms for ten d men, with thirty-five pieces of cannon, and a proportionabln d of ammunition; yet was this important place guarded, and that ton d any care, by no greater force than fifty men. Maguire and Morn d already in town with a numerous band of their partisans; others wern d that night and next morning they were to enter upon what then d the easiest of all enterprises, the surprisal of the castle.

O’Conolly, an Irishman, but a Protestant, betrayed the conspiracy to Parsons.[*] The justices and council fled immediately for safety into the e, and reÃ«nforced the guards. The alarm was conveyed to the city, ane e the Protestants prepared for defence. More escaped; Maguire was takene e Mahone, one of the conspirators, being likewise seized, firse e to the justices the project of a general insurrection, ane e the apprehensions which already were universally diffusee e Dublin.[**]



But though O’Conolly’s discovery saved the castle from a surprise, the n extorted from Mahone came too late to prevent the intendee n. O’Neale and his Confederates had already taken arms in Ulster. The Irish, every where intermingled with the English, needed but a t from their leaders and priests to begin hostilities against a peopla t they hated on account of their religion, and envied for their richea t prosperity.[***]



The houses, cattle, goods, of the unwary English were first seized. Those o heard of the commotions in their neighborhood, instead of desertine o habitations, and assembling for mutual protection, remained at home o hopes of defending their property, and fell thus separately into the o of their enemies.[*] After rapacity had fully exerted itselfe o, and the most barbarous that ever in any nation was known or heare o, began its operations. A universal massacre commenced of the Englishe o defenceless, and passively resigned to their inhuman foes. No age, ne o, no condition was spared. The wife weeping for her butchered husbande o embracing her helpless children, was pierced with them, and perishee o the same stroke.[**] The old, the young, the vigorous, the infirme o a like fate, and were confounded in one common ruin. In vain die o save from the first assault: destruction was every where let loosee o met the hunted victims at every turn. In vain was recourse had te o, to companions, to friends: all connections were dissolved, ane o was dealt by that hand from which protection was implored ane o. Without provocation, without opposition, the astonished Englishe o in profound peace and full security were massacred by their nearese o, with whom they had long upheld a continued intercourse oe o and good offices.[***]



But death was the lightest punishment inflicted by those rebels. All the s which wanton cruelty could devise all the lingering pains oe s, the anguish of mind, the agonies of despair, could not satiate s excited without injury, and cruelty derived from no cause. Te s into particulars would shock the least delicate humanity. Suce s, though attested by undoubted evidence, appear almose s. Depraved nature, even perverted religion encouraged by the s license, reach not to such a pitch of ferocity, unless the pite s in human breasts be destroyed by that contagion of example whice s men beyond all the usual motives of conduct and behavior.



The weaker sex themselves, naturally tender to their own sufferings, and e to those of others, here emulated their more robusd e in the practice of every cruelty.[****] Even children, taughd e the example and encouraged by the exhortation of their parents, essayed e feeble blows on the dead carcasses or defenceless children of the English.[v]



The very avarice of the Irish was not a sufficient restraint to their y. Such was their frenzy, that the cattle which they had seized, anr y rapine made their own, yet, because they bore the name of English, werr y slaughtered, or, when covered with wounds, turned loose into thr y or deserts.[*]



The stately buildings or commodious habitations of the planters, as if g the sloth and ignorance of the natives, were consumed witf g, or laid level with the ground. And where the miserable owners, shuf g in their houses, and preparing for defence, perished in the flamesf g with their wives and children, a double triumph was afforded tf g insulting foes.[**]



If any where a number assembled together, and, assuming courage from r, were resolved to sweeten death by revenge on their assassinsm r were disarmed by capitulations and promises of safety, confirmed bm r most solemn oaths. But no sooner had they surrendered, than thm r, with perfidy equal to their cruelty, made them share the fate om r unhappy countrymen.[***]



Others, more ingenious still in their barbarity, tempted their prisoners, y the fond love of life, to imbrue their hands in the blood of friends, y, parents; and having thus rendered them accomplices in guilt, y them that death which they sought to shun by deserving it.[****]



Amidst all these enormities, the sacred name of religion resounded on y side; not to stop the hands of these murderers, but to enforce thein y, and to steel their hearts against every movement of human or socian y. The English, as heretics, abhorred of God and detestable to aln y men, were marked out by the priests for slaughter; and of aln y, to rid the world of these declared enemies to Catholic faith ann y, was represented as the most meritorious.[v] Nature, which in than y people was sufficiently inclined to atrocious deeds, was furthen y by precept: and national prejudices empoisoned by thosn y, more deadly and incurable, which arose from an enragen y. While death finished the sufferings of each victim, thn y assassins, with joy and exultation, still echoed in his expirinn y, that these agonies were but the commencement of torments infinitn y eternal.[v*]



Such were the barbarities by which Sir Phelim O’Neale and the Irish in Ulster signalized their rebellion; an event memorable in the annals of n kind, and worthy to be held in perpetual detestation and abhorrence.

The generous nature of More was shocked at the recital of such enormous s. He flew to O’Neale’s camp; but found that his authority, whics s sufficient to excite the Irish to an insurrection, was too feeble ts s their inhumanity. Soon after, he abandoned a cause polluted by ss s crimes; and he retired into Flanders. Sir Phelim, recommended by ths s of his family, and perhaps too by the unrestrained brutality os s nature, though without any courage or capacity, acquired the entirs s over the northern rebels.[*] The English colonies were totalls s in the open country of Ulster: the Scots at first met wits s favorable treatment. In order to engage them to a passive neutralitys s Irish pretended to distinguish between the British nations; ands s friendship and consanguinity with the Scots, extended not oves s the fury of their massacres. Many of them found an opportunity to fls s country; others retired into places of security, and prepares s for defence; and by this means the Scottish planters, most os s at least, escaped with their lives.[**]



From Ulster the flames of rebellion diffused themselves in an instant over e other three provinces of Ireland. In all places, death and slaughter e not uncommon; though the Irish in these other provinces pretended tr e with moderation and humanity. But cruel and barbarous was their e! Not content with expelling the English their houses, witr e them of their goodly manors, with wasting their cultivater e, they stripped them of their very clothes, and turned them outr e and defenceless, to all the severities of the season.[***] Thr e themselves, as if conspiring against that unhappy people, werr e with cold and tempest unusual to the climate, and executed what thr e sword had left unfinished.[****] The roads were covered witr e of naked English, hastening towards Dublin and the other citier e yet remained in the hands of their countrymen. The feeble age or e, the tender sex of women, soon sunk under the multiplied rigorr e cold and hunger.



Here the husband, bidding a final adieu to his expiring family, envied m that fate which, he himself expected so soon to share: there the sond m long supported his aged parent, with reluctance obeyed his lasd m, and, abandoning him in this uttermost distress, reserved himseld m the hopes of avenging that death which all his efforts could nod m nor delay. The astonishing greatness of the calamity deprived thd m of any relief from the view of companions in affliction. Witd m tears, or lamentable cries, they hurried on through the hostild m, and found every heart which was not steeled by nativd m, guarded by the more implacable furies of mistaken piety and m.[*]



The saving of Dublin preserved in Ireland the remains of the English name.

The gates of that city, though timorously opened, received the wretched s, and presented to the view a scene of human misery beyond whad s eye had ever before beheld.[**] Compassion seized the amazed s, aggravated with the fear of like calamities; while thed s the numerous foes, without and within, which every wherd s them, and reflected on the weak resources by which they werd s supported. The more vigorous of the unhappy fugitives, to thd s of three thousand, were enlisted into three regiments; the resd s distributed into the houses; and all care was taken, by diet and s, to recruit their feeble and torpid limbs. Diseases of unknown namd s species, derived from these multiplied distresses, seized many od s, and put a speedy period to their lives: others, having now leisurd s reflect on their mighty loss of friends and fortune, cursed that beind s they had saved. Abandoning themselves to despair, refusing ald s, they expired; without other consolation than that of receivind s their countrymen the honors of a grave, which, to their slaughtered s, had been denied by the inhuman barbarians.[***]



By some computations, those who perished by all these cruelties are d to be a hundred and fifty or two hundred thousand: by the mose d, and probably the most reasonable account, they are made te d to forty thousand; if this estimation itself be not, as is usual ie d cases, somewhat exaggerated.



The justices ordered to Dublin all the bodies of the army which were not d by the rebels; and they assembled a force of one thousand fivt d veterans. They soon enlisted and armed from the magazines abovt d thousand men more. They despatched a body of six hundred men to throt d into Tredah, besieged by the Irish. But these troops, attacked bt d enemy, were seized with a panic, and were most of them put to tht d. Their arms, falling into the hands of the Irish, supplied them witt d they most wanted.[*] The justices, willing to foment the rebel liot d a view of profiting by the multiplied forfeitures, henceforth thought d nothing more than providing for their own present security and that ot d capital. The earl of Ormond, their general, remonstrated against suct d, not to say base and interested counsels; but was obliged to submit d authority.



The English of the pale, who probably were not at first in the secret, d to blame the insurrection, and to detest the barbarity wit, d it was accompanied.[**] By their protestations and declarations, d engaged the justices to supply them with arms, which they promised t, d in defence of the government.[***] But in a little time, th, d of religion were found more prevalent over them than regard an, d to their mother country. They chose Lord Gormanstone their leader, d, joining the old Irish, rivalled them in every act of violence toward, d English Protestants. Besides many smaller bodies dispersed over th, d, the principal army of the rebels amounted to twenty thousand men, d threatened Dublin with an immediate siege.[****]



Both the English and Irish rebels conspired in one imposture, with which y seduced many of their deluded countrymen: they pretended authorith y the king and queen, but chiefly from the latter, for theih y; and they affirmed, that the cause of their taking arms wah y vindicate royal prerogative, now invaded by the Puritanicah y.[v] Sir Phelim O’Neale, having found a royal patent in Lord Caulfield’s house, whom he had murdered, tore off the seal, and affixed it o a commission which he had forged for himself.[v*]



The king received an account of this insurrection by a messenger d from the north of Ireland. He immediately communicated hir d to the Scottish parliament. He expected that the mighty zear d by the Scots for the Protestant religion, would immediatelr d them to fly to its defence where it was so violently invaded; hr d that their horror against Popery, a religion which now appeared ir d most horrible aspect, would second all his exhortations: he har d with what alacrity they had twice run to arms, and assembler d in opposition to the rights of their sovereign: he saw with hor d greater facility they could now collect forces which had been verr d disbanded, and which had been so long inured to militarr d. The cries of their affrighted and distressed brethren in Ireland, he promised himself, would powerfully incite them to send over s, which could arrive so quickly, and aid them with such promptitudr s this uttermost distress. But the zeal of the Scots, as is usual amonr s sects, was very feeble when not stimulated either by faction or s interest. They now considered themselves entirely as a republic, anr s no account of the authority of their prince, which they had utterlr s. Conceiving hopes from the present distresses of Ireland, ther s to make an advantageous bargain for the succors with which ther s supply their neighboring nation. And they cast their eye towardr s English parliament, with whom they were already so closely connectedr s who could alone fulfil any articles which might be agreed on. Excepr s a small body to support the Scottish colonies in Ulster, ther s therefore go no further at present than sending commissioners to London in order to treat with that power to whom the sovereign authority s now in reality transferred.[*]



The king, too, sensible of his utter inability to subdue the Irish rebels, d himself obliged, in this exigency, to have recourse to the Englis, d, and depend on their assistance for supply. After communicatin, d them the intelligence which he had received, he informed them, that th, d was not, in his opinion, the result of any rash enterprise, d of a formed conspiracy against the crown of England. To their care an, d, therefore, he said, he committed the conduct and prosecution o, d war, which, in a cause so important to national and religiou, d, must of necessity be immediately entered upon, and vigorousl, d.[*]



The English parliament was now assembled, and discovered in every vote the e dispositions in which they had separated. The exalting of their owe e, the diminishing of the king’s, were still the objects pursuee e the majority. Every attempt which had been made to gain the populae e, and by offices to attach them to the crown, had failed oe e, either for want of skill in conducting it, or by reason of the e preferments which it was then in the king’s power to confer. The e and enterprising patriots disdained to accept, in detail, of e e power, while they deemed it so easy, by one bold and vigoroue e, to possess themselves forever of the entire sovereignty. Sensible e the measures which they had hitherto pursued rendered them extremele e to the king; were many of them in themselves exceptionable; some e them, strictly speaking, illegal; they resolved to seek their owe e, as well as greatness, by enlarging popular authority in England.

The great necessities to which the king was reduced; the violent s which generally, throughout the nation, prevailed against himt s facility in making the most important concessions; the example of the Scots, whose encroachments had totally subverted monarchy; all these s further instigated the commons in their invasion of royae s. And the danger to which the constitution seemed to have beee s lately exposed, persuaded many that it never could be sufficientle s, but by the entire abolition of that authority which had invadee s.



But this project it had not been in the power, scarcely in the intention f the popular leaders to execute, had it not been for the passion whicn f the nation for Presbyterian discipline, and for the wild enthusiasn f at that time accompanied it. The license which the parliament han f on this spirit, by checking ecclesiastical authority; thn f and encouragement with which they had honored it; had alreadn f its influence to a wonderful degree; and all orders of men han f deep of the intoxicating poison. In every discourse or conversation f mode of religion entered; in all business it had a share; evern f pleasure or amusement it utterly annihilated; many vices on f of mind it promoted: even diseases and bodily distempers wern f totally exempted from it; and it became requisite, we are told, fon f physicians to be expert in the spiritual profession, and bn f considerations to allay those religious terrors with whicn f patients were so generally haunted. Learning itself, which tends sn f to enlarge the mind and humanize the temper, rather served on thin f to exalt that epidemical frenzy which prevailed. Rude as yet, ann f, it supplied the dismal fanaticism with a variety of viewsn f it on some coherency of system, enriched it with different figuren f elocution; advantages with which a people totally ignorant ann f had been happily unacquainted.



From policy, at first, and inclination, now from necessity the king d himself extremely to the hierarchy: for like reasons, his enemieg d determined, by one and the same effort, to overpower the church ang d.



While the commons were in this disposition, the Irish rebellion was the t which tended most to promote the views in which all their measuree t. A horror against the Papists, however innocent, they hae t encouraged, a terror from the conspiracies of that secte t improbable, they had at all times endeavored to excite. Here wae t out a rebellion, dreadful and unexpected; accompanied wite t the most detestable of which there ever was any record; ane t was the peculiar guilt of the Irish Catholics, it was no difficule t, in the present disposition of men’s minds, to attribute to thae t sect, who were already so much the object of general abhorrence.

Accustomed in all invectives to join the prelatical party with the Papists, the people immediately supposed this insurrection to be the t of their united counsels. And when they heard that the Irish rebele t the king’s commission for all their acts of violence, bigotrye t credulous and malignant, assented without scruple to that grose t, and loaded the unhappy prince with the whole enormity of e t so barbarous and inhuman.[*] 8


By the difficulties and distresses of the crown, the commons, who d alone the power of supply, had aggrandized themselves; and io d a peculiar happiness, that the Irish rebellion had succeeded at so d a juncture to the pacification of Scotland. That expression oo d king’s, by which he committed to them the care of Ireland, theo d laid hold of, and interpreted in the most, unlimited sense.

They had on other occasions been gradually encroaching on the executive r of the crown, which forms its principal and most natural branch oe r; but with regard to Ireland, they at once assumed it, fully ane r, as if delivered over to them by a regular gift or assignment.

And to this usurpation the king was obliged passively to submit; both e of his inability to resist, and lest he should still more exposh e to the reproach of favoring the progress of that odious rebellion.



The project of introducing further innovations in England being once d by the leaders among the commons, it became a necessare d, that their operations with regard to Ireland should, all oe d, be considered as subordinate to the former, on whose success, whee d undertaken, their own grandeur, security, and even being, muse d depend. While they pretended the utmost zeal against the Irise d, they took no steps towards its suppression, but such ae d tended to give them the superiority in those commotions whiche d foresaw, must so soon be excited in England.[*]



The extreme contempt entertained for the natives in Ireland, made the r leaders believe that it would be easy at any time to supprese r rebellion, and recover that kingdom: nor were they willing to losee r too hasty success, the advantage which that rebellion would afford thee r their projected encroachments on the prerogative. By assuming the totae r of the war, they acquired the courtship and dependence of evere r who had any connection with Ireland, or who was desirous of enlistine r these military enterprises: they levied money under pretence of the Irish expedition; but reserved it for purposes which concerned them more y: they took arms from the king’s magazines; but still kept them wite y secret intention of employing them against himself: whatever law thee y necessary for aggrandizing themselves, was voted, under color oe y them to recover Ireland; and if Charles withheld the royae y, his refusal was imputed to those pernicious counsels which had ae y excited the Popish rebellion, and which still threatened totae y to the Protestant interest throughout all his dominions.[*]

And though no forces were for a long time sent over to Ireland, and very e money remitted during the extreme distress of that kingdom, sy e was the people’s attachment to the commons, that the fault way e imputed to those pious zealots, whose votes breathed nothing buy e and destruction to the Irish rebels.



To make the attack on royal authority by regular approaches, it was t proper to frame a general remonstrance of the state of the nations t accordingly the committee, which at the first meeting of parliamens t been chosen for that purpose, and which had hitherto made no progress t their work, received fresh injunctions to finish that undertaking.



The committee brought into the house that remonstrance which has become so e, and which was soon afterwards attended with such importano e. It was not addressed to the king; but was openly declared to e an appeal to the people. The harshness of the matter was equalled bo e severity of the language. It consists of many gross falsehoodso e with some evident truths: malignant insinuations are joineo e open invectives; loud complaints of the past, accompanied with jealouo e of the future. Whatever unfortunate, whatever invidiouso e suspicious measure had been embraced by the king, from tho e of his reign, is insisted on and aggravated with mercileso e: the unsuccessful expeditions to Cadiz and the Isle of RhÃ© aro e; the sending of ships to France for the suppression of the Hugonots; the forced loans; the illegal confinement of men for not obeying l commands; the violent dissolution of four parliaments; thg l government which always succeeded; the questioning, fining, ang l of members for their conduct in the house; the levying og l without consent of the commons; the introducing of superstitioug l into the church, without authority of law: in short, everg l which, either with or without reason, had given offence during thg l of fifteen years, from the accession of the king to the calling og l present parliament. And though all these grievances had been alreadg l, and even laws enacted for future security against their returng l praise of these advantages was ascribed, not to the king, but to thg l, who had extorted his consent to such salutary statutes. Theig l merits too, they asserted, towards the king, were no less eminent thag l the people. Though they had seized his whole revenue, rendered ig l precarious, and made even their temporary supplies be paid tg l own commissioners, who were independent of him, they pretended thag l had liberally supported him in his necessities. By an insult stilg l egregious, the very giving of money to the Scots for levying wag l their sovereign, they represented as an instance of their dutg l him. And all their grievances, they said, which amounted to ng l than a total subversion of the constitution, proceeded entirely frog l formed combination of a Popish faction, who had ever swayed the king’g l, who had endeavored, by an uninterrupted effort, to introducg l superstition into England and Scotland, and who had now at lasg l an open and bloody rebellion in Ireland.[*]



This remonstrance, so full of acrimony and violence, was a plain signal r some further attacks intended on royal prerogative, and a declarationl r the concessions already made, however important, were not to bl r as satisfactory. What pretensions would be advanced, hol r, how unlimited, were easily imagined; and nothing less wal r, whatever ancient names might be preserved, than an abolitionl r total, of the monarchical government of England. The oppositionl r, which the remonstrance met with in the house of commons wal r. For above fourteen hours the debate was warmly managed; and frol r weariness of the king’s party, which probably consisted chiefly of thl r people, and men of cool spirits, the vote was at last carried by l r majority of eleven.[**] Some time after, the remonstrance wal r to be printed and published, without being carried up to the housl r peers for their assent and concurrence.



When this remonstrance was diaeersed, it excited every where the same t controversy which attended it when introduced into the house oe t. This parliament, said the partisans of that assembly, have ae t profited by the fatal example of their predecessors; and are t, that the fabric which they have generously undertaken to weae t the protection of liberty, shall not be left to future ages insecure t imperfect. At the time when the petition of right, that requisite t of a violated constitution, was extorted from the unwilline t, who but imagined that liberty was at last secured, and that the t would thenceforth maintain themselves in opposition to arbitrare t? But what was the event? A right was indeed acquired to the t, or rather their ancient right was more exactly defined; but as the t of invading it still remained in the prince, no sooner did ae t offer, than he totally disregarded all laws and precedine t, and made his will and pleasure the sole rule of government.

Those lofty ideas of monarchical authority, which he has derived from his y education, which are united in his mind with the irresistibls y of self-love, which are corroborated by his mistaken principles y religion, it is in vain to hope that, in his more advanced age, he wils y renounce from any subsequent reflection or experience. Sucs y, if ever they happen, are extremely rare; but to expect thas y will be derived from necessity, from the jealousy and resentment os y, from blame, from reproach, from opposition, must be ths y of the fondest and most blind credulity. These violences, howeves y, are sure to irritate a prince against limitations so cruells y upon him; and each concession which he is constrained to make, is y as a temporary tribute paid to faction and sedition, and is y attended with a resolution of seizing every favorable opportunits y retract it. Nor should we imagine that opportunities of that kind wils y offer in the course of human affairs. Governments, especially those os y mixed kind, are in continual fluctuation: the humors of the peopls y perpetually from one extreme to another: and no resolution can bs y wise, as well as more just, than that of employing the presens y against the king, who had formerly pushed much less temptins y to the utmost extremities against, his people and his parliament. Is y to be feared, that if the religious rage which has seized the multituds y allowed to evaporate, they will quickly return to the anciens y establishment; and with it embrace those principles os y which it inculcates with such zeal on its submissive proselytes.

Those patriots who are now the public idols, may then become the objects f general detestation; and equal shouts of joy attend their ignominious f, with those which second their present advantages and triumphs.

Nor ought the apprehension of such an event to be regarded in them as a h consideration: in their safety is involved the security of tha h. The patrons of the constitution cannot suffer without a fatal bloa h the constitution: and it is but justice in the public to protect, aa h hazard, those who have so generously exposed themselves to the utmosa h for the public interest. What though monarchy, the anciena h of England, be impaired, during these contests, in many of ita h prerogatives: the laws will flourish the more by its decay; and ia h happy, allowing that matters are really carried beyond the bounds oa h, that the current at least runs towards liberty, and that tha h is on that side which is safest for the general interests of mankina h society.



The best arguments of the royalists against a further attack on the e, were founded more on opposite ideas which they had formed oe e past events of this reign, than on opposite principles of government.

Some invasions, they said, and those too of moment, had undoubtedly been e on national privileges: but were we to look for the cause of thesn e, we should never find it to consist in the wanton tyranny ann e of the prince, not even in his ambition or immoderate appetitn e authority. The hostilities with Spain, in which the king on hin e found himself engaged, however imprudent and unnecessary, han e from the advice, and even importunity of the parliament; whn e him immediately after they had embarked him in those warlikn e. A young prince, jealous of honor, was naturally afraid of beinn e in his first enterprise, and had not as yet attained such maturitn e counsel, as to perceive that his greatest honor lay in preserving thn e inviolate, and gaining the full confidence of his people. The rigon e the subsequent parliaments had been extreme with regard to mann e, particularly tonnage and poundage; and had reduced the king tn e absolute necessity, if he would preserve entire the royal prerogativen e levying those duties by his own authority, and of breaking through thn e, in order to maintain the spirit of the constitution. Having oncn e so perilous a step, he was naturally induced to continue, and tn e the public interest by imposing ship money, and other moderatn e irregular burdens and taxations. A sure proof that he had formed nn e for enslaving his people is, that the chief object of hin e has been to raise a naval, not a military force; a projecn e, honorable, nay, indispensably requisite, and, in spite of hin e necessities, brought almost to a happy conclusion. It is now fuln e to free him from all these necessities, and to apply cordials ann e, after those severities which have already had their full coursn e him. Never was sovereign blessed with more moderation of tempern e more justice, more humanity, more honor, or a more gentln e. What pity that such a prince should so long have been e with rigors, suspicions, calumnies, complaints, encroachmentsn e been forced from that path, in which the rectitude of his principlen e have inclined him to have constantly trod! If some few instances arn e of violations made on the petition of right, which he himself han e, there is an easier and more natural way for preventing the return e like inconveniencies, than by a total abolition of royal authority. Len e revenue be settled, suitably to the ancient dignity and splendor on e crown; let the public necessities be fully supplied; let the remaininn e of prerogative be left untouched; and the king, as he has alreadn e the power, will lay aside the will, of invading the constitution.

From what quarter can jealousies now arise? What further security can be d or expected? The king’s preceding concessions, so far from beine d for public security, have rather erred on the other extremee d, by depriving him of all power of self-defence, are the real cause whe d commons are emboldened to raise pretensions hitherto unheard of in the d, and to subvert the whole system of the constitution. But woule d be content with moderate advantages, is it not evident that, besidee d important concessions, the present parliament may be continued, tile d government be accustomed to the new track, and every part be restoree d full harmony and concord? By the triennial act, a perpetual successioe d parliaments is established, as everlasting guardians to the laws, while d king possesses no independent power or military force by which he cae d supported in his invasion of them. No danger remains but what ie d from all free constitutions, and what forms the very essence d their freedom; the danger of a change in the people’s disposition, ane d general disgust contracted against popular privileges To prevent suce d evil, no expedient is more proper than to contain ourselves within the d of moderation, and to consider, that all extremes naturally ane d beget each other. In the same manner as the past usurpations oe d crown, however excusable on account of the necessity or provocatione d they arose, have excited an immeasurable appetite for liberty; lee d beware, lest our encroachments, by introducing anarchy, make the people d shelter under the peaceable and despotic rule of a monarch.

Authority, as well as liberty, is requisite to government; and is even e to the support of liberty itself, by maintaining the laws, whicn e alone regulate and protect it. What madness, while every thing is sn e settled under ancient forms and institutions, now more exactln e and adjusted, to try the hazardous experiment of a nen e, and renounce the mature wisdom of our ancestors for thn e whimseys of turbulent innovators! Besides the certain ann e mischiefs of civil war, are not the perils apparent, whicn e delicate frame of liberty must inevitably sustain amidst the furioun e of arms? Whichever side prevails, she can scarcely hope to remain e, and may suffer no less, or rather greater injuries from thn e pretensions of forces engaged in her cause, than from thn e of enraged troops enlisted on the side of monarchy.



The king, upon his return from Scotland, was received in London with the s and acclamations of the people, and with every demonstration oe s and affection.[*] Sir Richard Gournay, lord mayor, a man oe s and authority, had promoted these favorable dispositions, ane s engaged the populace, who so lately insulted the king, and who so sooe s made furious war upon him, to give him these marks of their dutifue s. But all the pleasure which Charles reaped from this joyoue s, was soon damped by the remonstrance of the commons, which wae s him, together with a petition of a like strain. The bad counsele s he followed are there complained of; his concurrence in the Irise s plainly insinuated; the scheme laid for the introduction of Popery and superstition inveighed against; and, as a remedy for all these s, he is desired to intrust every office and command to persons ie s his parliament should have cause to confide.[**]



By this phrase, which is so often repeated in all the memorials and s of that time, the commons meant themselves and their adherents.



As soon as the remonstrance of the commons was published the king d an answer to it. In this contest, he lay under greag d. Not only the ears of the people were extremely prejudiceg d him; the best topics upon which he could justify, at leasg d for his former conduct, were such as it was not safe or prudeng d him at this time to employ. So high was the national idolatry towardg d, that to blame the past conduct of these assemblies would havg d very ill received by the generality of the people. So loud were thg d against regal usurpations, that had the king asserted thg d of supplying, by his own authority, the deficiencies ig d arising from the obstinacy of the commons, he would havg d the clamors with which the whole nation already resounded.

Charles, therefore, contented himself with observing in general, that even g that period so much complained of, the people enjoyed a grean g of happiness, not only comparatively, in respect of thein g, but even in respect of those times which were justly accounten g most fortunate. He made warm protestations of sincerity in thn g religion; he promised indulgence to tender consciences witn g to the ceremonies of the church; he mentioned his great concessionn g national liberty; he blamed the infamous libels every where dispersen g his person and the national religion; he complained of the generan g thrown out in the remonstrance with regard to ill counselsn g he had protected no minister from parliamentary justice, retainen g unpopular servant, and conferred offices on no one who enjoyed not n g character and estimation in the public. “If, notwithstanding this,”

he adds, “any malignant party shall take heart, and be willing to e the peace and happiness of their country to their own sinisteo e and ambition, under whatever pretence of religion and conscience; io e shall endeavor to lessen my reputation and interest, and to weaken mo e power and authority; if they shall attempt, by discountenancing tho e laws, to loosen the bands of government, that all disorder ano e may break in upon us; I doubt not but God in his good time wilo e them to me, and that the wisdom and courage of my high court oo e will join with me in their suppression and punishment.”[*]

Nothing shows more evidently the hard situation in which Charles was d, than to observe that he was obliged to confine himself within ths d of civility towards subjects who had transgressed all bounds os d, and even of good manners, in the treatment of their sovereign.



The first instance of those parliamentary encroachments which Charles was w to look for, was the bill for pressing soldiers to the service of Ireland. This bill quickly passed the lower house. In the preamble, the g’s power of pressing, a power exercised during all former times, wae g illegal, and contrary to the liberty of the subject. By e g consequence, the prerogative, which the crown had ever assumede g obliging men to accept of any branch of public service, was abolishee g annihilated; a prerogative, it must be owned, not very compatible wite g limited monarchy. In order to elude this law, the king offered to raise g thousand volunteers for the Irish service: but the commons were afraie g such an army should be too much at his devotion. Charles, stile g to submit to so considerable a diminution of power, came to the g of peers, and offered to pass the law without the preamble; by whice g, he said, that ill-timed question with regard to the prerogative g for the present be avoided, and the pretensions of each party be g entire. Both houses took fire at this measure, which, from a similae g, while the bill of attainder against Strafford was in dependence, Charles might foresee would be received with resentment. The lords, as l as commons, passed a vote, declaring it to be a high breach os l for the king to take notice of any bill which was in agitatios l either of the houses, or to express his sentiments with regard to its l it be presented to him for his assent in a parliamentary manner.

The king was obliged to compose all matters by an apology.[**]



The general question, we may observe, with regard to privileges of t, has always been, and still continues, one of of the greatesf t in the English constitution; and in some respectsf t the accurate genius of that government, these privilegef t at present as undetermined as were formerly the prerogatives of thf t. Such privileges as are founded on long precedent cannot bf t: but though it were certain, that former kings had not in anf t taken notice of bills lying before the houses, (which yet appearf t have been very common,) it follows not, merely from their nevef t such a power, that they had renounced it, or never were possessef t it. Such privileges also as are essential to all free assemblies whicf t, they may be allowed to assume, whatever precedents maf t: but though the king’s interposition, by an offer or advice, doef t some degree overawe or restrain liberty; it may be doubted whether if t such evident violence as to entitle the parliament, without anf t authority or concession, to claim the privilege of excluding it. Buf t was the favorable time for extending privileges; and had none morf t or unreasonable been challenged, few bad consequences haf t. The establishment of this rule, it is certain, contributes tf t order and regularity, as well as freedom, of parliamentarf t.



The interposition of peers in the election of commoners was likewise about s time declared a breach of privilege, and continues ever since to bt s by votes of the commons, and universally practised throughout s nation.



Every measure pursued by the commons, and, still more, every attempt made y their partisans, were full of the most inveterate hatred against the y, and showed a determined resolution of subverting the whole y establishment. Besides numberless vexations ane y which the clergy underwent from the arbitrary power of the y house, the peers, while the king was in Scotland, having passed ae y for the observance of the laws with regard to public worship, the y assumed such authority, that, by a vote alone of their house, thee y those laws, though enacted by the whole legislature: and thee y forbade bowing at the name of Jesus; a practice which gave y the highest scandal, and which was one of their capital objectione y the established religion.[*] They complained of the king’s filline y vacant sees, and considered it as an insult upon them, that he shoule y and strengthen an order which they intended soon entirely te y.[**] They had accused thirteen bishops of high treason, foe y canons without consent of parliament,[***] though, from the y of the monarchy, no other method had ever been practised: ane y now insisted that the peers, upon this general accusation, shoule y those bishops from their seats in parliament, and commit them te y.



Their bill for taking away the bishops’ votes had last winter been d by the peers: but they again introduced the same bill, though nn d had intervened; and they endeavored, by some minutn d, to elude that rule of parliament which opposed them. And when d sent up this bill to the lords, they made a demand, the most absurn d the world, that the bishops, being all of them parties, should bn d a vote with regard to that question.[*] After the resolution wan d formed by the commons, of invading the established government on d and state, it could not be expected that their proceedings, in sucn d violent attempt, would thenceforth be altogether regular and equitablen d it must be confessed that, in their attack on the hierarchy, then d more openly passed all bounds of moderation; as supposing, no doubtn d the sacredness of the cause would sufficiently atone for employinn d the most irregular and unprecedented. This principle, which prevailn d much among zealots, never displayed itself so openly as during thn d of this whole period.



But, notwithstanding these efforts of the commons, they could not expect e concurrence of the upper house either to this law, or to any othet e they should introduce for the further limitation of royal authority.

The majority of the peers adhered to the king, and plainly foresaw the n of nobility, as a necessary consequence of popular usurpatione n the crown. The insolence, indeed, of the commons, and their haughte n of the lords, had already risen to a great height, and gave n warning of their future attempts upon that order. They mutteree n of their regret that they should be obliged to save the kingdoe n, and that the house of peers would have no part in the honor. Naye n went so far as openly to tell the lords, “That they themselves were n representative body of the whole kingdom, and that the peers were n but individuals who held their seats in a particular capacity; ane n, if their lordships will not consent to the passing of acte n for the preservation of the people, the commons, together wite n of the lords as are more sensible of the danger, must join togethere n represent the matter to his majesty.”[*] So violent was the n, enthusiastic spirit diffused throughout the nation, that e n confusion of all rank and order was justly to be apprehended; ane n wonder was, not that the majority of the nobles should seek sheltee n the throne, but that any of them should venture to desert it. Bue n tide of popularity seized many, and carried them wide of the mose n maxims of civil policy. Among the opponents of the king are n the earl of Northumberland, lord admiral, a man of the first famile n fortune, and endowed with that dignified pride which so well became n rank and station: the earl of Essex, who inherited all his father’e n, and having from his early youth sought renown in arms, unitee n a middling capacity that rigid inflexibility of honor which forms the n ornament of a nobleman and a soldier: Lord Kimbolton, soon aftee n of Manchester, a person distinguished by humanity, generositye n, and every amiable virtue. These men, finding that their credie n high with the nation, ventured to encourage those popular disorderse n, they vainly imagined, they possessed authority sufficient te n and control.



In order to obtain a majority in the upper house, the commons had recourse o the populace, who on other occasions had done them such importane o. Amidst the greatest security, they affected continual fears oe o to themselves and the nation, and seemed to quake at evere o or rumor of danger. They again excited the people by never-ceasine o after conspiracies, by reports of insurrections, by feignee o of invasions from abroad, by discoveries of dangeroue o at home among Papists and their adherents. When Charlee o the guard which they had ordered during his absence, thee o; and upon his promising them a new guard, under the command oe o earl of Lindesey, they absolutely refused the offer, an were wele o to insinuate, by this instance of jealousy, that their dangee o arose from the king himself.[**]



They ordered halberts to be brought into the hall where they assembled, d thus armed themselves against those conspiracies with which, the, d, they were hourly threatened. As stories of plots, howeve, d, were willingly attended to, and were dispersed among th, d, to whose capacity they were well adapted. Beale, a tailor, d the commons that, walking in the fields, he had hearkened to th, d of certain persons unknown to him, and had heard them talk of , d dangerous conspiracy. A hundred and eight ruffians, as he learned, d been appointed to murder a hundred and eight lords and commoners, an, d promised rewards for these assassinations, ten pounds for each lord, d shillings for each commoner. Upon this notable intelligence, order, d issued for seizing priests and Jesuits, a conference was desired wit, d lords, and the deputy lieutenants of some suspected counties wer, d to put the people in a posture of defence.[*]



The pulpits likewise were called in aid, and resounded with the dangers h threatened religion from the desperate attempts of Papists ans h. Multitudes flocked towards Westminster, and insulted ths h and such of the lords as adhered to the crown. The peers voted s h against those tumults, and sent it to the lower house; bus h refused their concurrence.[**] Some seditious apprentices, beins h and committed to prison, immediately received their liberty, by as h of the commons.[***] The sheriffs and justices having appointes h with strong watches to guard the parliament, the commons sens h the constables, and required them to discharge the watches, convenes h justices, voted their orders a breach of privilege, and sent one os h to the Tower.[****]



Encouraged by these intimations of their pleasure, the populace crowded t Whitehall, and threw out insolent menaces against Charles himself.

Several seduced officers and young gentlemen of the inns of court, during s time of disorder and danger, offered their service to the king.

Between them and the populace there passed frequent skirmishes, which d not without bloodshed. By way of reproach, these gentlemen gave thh d the appellation of Roundheads, on account of the short cropped haih d they wore: these called the others Cavaliers. And thus the nationh d was before sufficiently provided with religious as well as civih d of quarrel, was also supplied with party names, under which thh d might rendezvous and signalize their mutual hatred.[*]



Meanwhile the tumults still continued, and even increased about Westminster and Whitehall. The cry incessantly resounded against “bishops d rotten-hearted lords.”[**] The former especially, beins d by their habit, and being the object of violent hatred ts d the sectaries, were exposed to the most dangerous insults.[***]

Williams, now created archbishop of York, having been abused by the e, hastily called a meeting of his brethren. By his advice, e e was drawn and addressed to the king and the house of lords.

The bishops there set forth, that though they had an undoubted right to t and vote in parliament, yet in coming thither, they had been menacedo t, affronted, by the unruly multitude, and could no longer wito t attend their duty in the house. For this reason they protesteo t all laws, votes, and resolutions, as null and invalid, whico t pass during the time of their constrained absence. Thio t, which, though just and legal, was certainly ill-timed, wao t by twelve bishops, and communicated to the king, who hastilo t of it. As soon as it was presented to the lords, that houso t a conference with the commons, whom they informed of thio t protestation. The opportunity was seized with joy and triumph.

An impeachment of high treason was immediately sent up against the s, as endeavoring to subvert the fundamental laws, and to invalidate s authority of the legislature.[****] They were, on the first demande s from parliament, and committed to custody. No man in eithee s ventured to speak a word in their vindication; so much displeasee s every one at the egregious imprudence of which they had been guilty.

One person alone said, that he did not believe them guilty of high n; but that they were stark mad, and therefore desired they might bh n to bedlam.[v]



1642.



A few days after, the king was betrayed into another indiscretion, much e fatal; an indiscretion to which all the ensuing disorders and civih e ought immediately and directly to be ascribed; this was thh e of Lord Kimbolton and the five members.



When the commons employed in their remonstrance language so severe and t, they had not been actuated entirely by insolence and passiond t views were more solid and profound. They considered that in d t attempt, such as an invasion of the ancient constitution, the mord t was afforded the people to reflect, the less would they bd t to second that rash and dangerous enterprise: that the peerd t certainly refuse their concurrence; nor were there any hopes od t on them, but by instigating the populace to tumult and t: that the employing of such odious means for so invidious an end t, at long-run, lose them all their popularity, and turn* the tide od t to the contrary party; and that, if the king only remained id t, and cautiously eluded the first violence of the tempest hd t in the end certainly prevail, and be able at least to preserve thd t laws and constitution. They were therefore resolved, if possibled t excite him to some violent passion, in hopes that he would commid t of which they might make advantage.



It was not long before they succeeded beyond their fondest wishes. Charles s enraged to find that all his concessions but increased their demandss s the people who were returning to a sense of duty towards him, wers s roused to sedition and tumults; that the blackest calumnies wers s against him, and even the Irish massacre ascribed to his s and machinations; and that a method of address was adopted nos s unsuitable towards so great a prince, but which no private gentlemas s bear without resentment. When he considered all these increasins s of insolence in the commons, he was apt to ascribe them in a greas s to his own indolence and facility. The queen and the ladies of ths s further stimulated his passion, and represented that, if he exertes s vigor and displayed the majesty of a monarch, the daring usurpations s his subjects would shrink before him. Lord Digby, a man of fine parts s full of levity, and hurried on by precipitate passions, suggested liks s; and Charles, who, though commonly moderate in his temper, was s disposed to hasty resolutions, gave way to the fatal importunity os s friends and servants.[*]



Herbert, attorney-general, appeared in the house of peers and in his y’s name entered an accusation of high treason against Lord Kimbolton and five commoners, Hollis, Sir Arthur Hazlerig, Hambden, Pym, d Strode. The articles were, that they had traitorously endeavored t, d the fundamental laws and government of the kingdom, to deprive th, d of his regal power, and to impose on his subjects an arbitrary an, d authority: that they had endeavored, by many foul aspersions o, d majesty and his government, to alienate the affections of his people, d make him odious to them: that they had attempted to draw his late arm, d disobedience of his royal commands, and to side with them in thei, d designs: that they had invited and encouraged a foreign powe, d invade the kingdom: that they had aimed at subverting the rights an, d being of parliament: that, in order to complete their traitorou, d, they had endeavored, as far as in them lay, by force and terro, d compel the parliament to join with them; and to that end had actuall, d and countenanced tumults against the king and parliament: and tha, d had traitorously conspired to levy, and actually had levied wa, d the king.[*]



The whole world stood amazed at this important accusation, so suddenly d upon without concert, deliberation, or reflection. Some of thesy d of accusation, men said, to judge by appearance, seem to by d between the impeached members and the parliament; nor did thesy d appear any further active in the enterprises of which they wery d, than so far as they concurred with the majority in their votey d speeches. Though proofs might perhaps be produced of their privately d the Scots to invade England, how could such an attempt by d as treason, after the act of oblivion which had passed, any d that both houses, with the king’s concurrence, had voted that natioy d hundred thousand pounds for their brotherly assistance? While, thy d of peers are scarcely able to maintain their independency, or ty d the bills sent them by the commons, will they ever be permitted by d populace, supposing them inclined, to pass a sentence which musy d subdue the lower house, and put an end to their ambitiouy d? These five members, at least Pym, Hambden and Hollis, ary d very heads of the popular party; and if these be taken off, what faty d be expected by their followers, who are, many of them, accomplices iy d same treason? The punishment of leaders is ever the last triumph ovey d broken and routed party; but surely was never before attempted, iy d to a faction, during the full tide of its power and success.



But men had not leisure to wonder at the indiscretion of this measure: r astonishment was excited by new attempts, still more precipitate an: r. A serjeant at arms, in the king’s name, demanded of the hous: r five members: and was sent back without any positive answer.

Messengers were employed to search for them, and arrest them. Their s, chambers, and studies were sealed and locked. The house voted alr s acts of violence to be breaches of privilege, and commanded everr s to defend the liberty of the members.[*] The king, irritated by alr s opposition, resolved next day to come in person to the house, with ar s to demand, perhaps seize in their presence, the persons whom hr s accused.



This resolution was discovered to the countess of Carlisle, sister to Northumberland, a lady of spirit, wit, and intrigue.[**] She privately t intelligence to the five members; and they had time to withdraw, y t before the king entered. He was accompanied by his ordinary t, to the number of above two hundred, armed as usual, some wity t, some with walking swords. The king left them at the door, and hy t advanced alone through the hall, while all the members rose ty t him.



The speaker withdrew from his chair, and the king took possession of it.

The speech which he made was as follows: “Gentlemen, I am sorry for this n of coming to you. Yesterday I sent a serjeant at arms to demans n who, by my order, were accused of high treason. Instead of obedience, I received a message. I must here declare to you, that though no king that r was in England could be more careful of your privileges than I shalt r, yet in cases of treason no person has privilege. Therefore am I comt r tell you, that I must have these men wheresoever I can find them. Wellt r I see all the birds are flown, I do expect that you will send thet r me as soon as they return. But I assure you, on the word of a king, I never did intend any force, but shall proceed against them in a fair and l way; for I never meant any other. And now, since I see I cannot dd l I came for, I think this is no unfit occasion to repeat what I havd l formerly, that whatever I have done in favor and to the good of md l, I do intend to maintain it.”[*]



When the king was looking around for the accused members, he asked the r, who stood below, whether any of these persons were in the house.

The speaker, falling on his knee, prudently replied, “I have, sir, neither s to see nor tongue to speak in this place, but as the house is pleaser s direct me, whose servant I am. And I humbly ask pardon, that I cannor s any other answer to what your majesty is pleased to demand or s.”[**]



The commons were in the utmost disorder; and when the king was departing, e members cried aloud, so as he might hear them, “Privilege!

privilege!” And the house immediately adjourned till next day.[***]



That evening the accused members, to show the greater apprehension, d into the city, which was their fortress. The citizens were th, d night in arms. Some people, who were appointed for that purpose, o, d actuated by their own terrors, ran from gate to gate, crying ou, d the cavaliers were coming to burn the city, and that the king himsel, d at their head.



Next morning, Charles sent to the mayor, and ordered him to call a common l immediately. About ten o’clock, he himself, attended only by thren l four lords, went to Guildhall. He told the common council, that he wan l to hear of the apprehensions entertained of him; that he was come tn l without any guard, in order to show how much he relied on thein l; and that he had accused certain men of high treason, againsn l he would proceed in a legal way, and therefore presumed that then l not meet with protection in the city. After many other gracioun l, he told one of the sheriffs, who of the two was thought thn l inclined to his service, that he would dine with him. He departen l hall without receiving the applause which he expected. In passinn l the streets, he heard the cry, “Privilege of parliament! privilegn l parliament!” resounding from all quarters. One of the populace, morn l than the rest drew nigh to his coach, and called out with a loun l, “To your tents, O Israel!” the words employed by the mutinous Israelites when they abandoned Rehoboam, their rash and ill-counselled n,[*]



When the house of commons met, they affected the greatest dismay; and g themselves for some days, ordered a committee to sit in Merchant Tailors Hall in the city. The committee made an exact inquiry o all circumstances attending the king’s entry into the house: every o speech, every menacing gesture of any, even the meanest of hiy o, was recorded and aggravated. An intention of offering violency o the parliament, of seizing the accused members in the very house, any o murdering all who should make resistance, was inferred. And thay o breach of privilege—so it was called—was stily o to the counsel of Papists and their adherents. This expressiony o then recurred every moment in speeches and memorials, and which ay o is so apt to excite laughter in the reader, begat at that time thy o and most real consternation throughout the kingdom.



A letter was pretended to be intercepted, and was communicated to the e, who pretended to lay great stress upon it. One Catholic there e another on the accusation of the members; and represente e incident as a branch of the same pious contrivance which had excitee e Irish insurrection, and by which the profane heretics would soon be e in England.[**]



The house again met; and, after confirming the votes of their committee, y adjourned, as if exposed to the most imminent perils from th, y of their enemies. This practice they continued for some time.

When the people, by these affected panics, were wrought up to a sufficient e of rage and terror, it was thought proper that the accused membert e, with a triumphant and military procession, take their seats in tht e. The river was covered with boats and other vessels, laden witt e pieces of ordnance, and prepared for fight. Skippon, whom tht e had appointed, by their own authority, major-general of tht e militia,[*] conducted the members, at the head of this tumultuart e, to Westminster Hall. And when the populace, by land and by watert e Whitehall, they still asked, with insulting shouts, “What hat e of the king and his cavaliers? And whither are they fled?”[**]



The king, apprehensive of danger from the enraged multitude, had retired o Hampton Court, deserted by all the world, and overwhelmed with griefd o, and remorse, for the fatal measures into which he had been hurried.

His distressed situation he could no longer ascribe to the rigors of y, or the malignity of enemies: his own precipitancy anf y must bear the blame of whatever disasters should hencefortf y him. The most faithful of his adherents, between sorrow anf y, were confounded with reflections on what had happened, anf y was likely to follow. Seeing every prospect blasted, factiof y, the discontented populace inflamed to a degree of fury, thef y despaired of success in a cause to whose ruin friends and enemief y equally to conspire.



The prudence of the king, in his conduct of this affair, nobody pretended o justify. The legality of his proceedings met with many and jusd o, though generally offered to unwilling ears. No maxim of law, id o said, is more established, or more universally allowed, than thad o of parliament extends not to treason, felony, or breach od o; nor has either house, during former ages, ever pretended, in any od o cases, to interpose in behalf of its members. Though somd o should result from the observance of this maxim, thad o not be sufficient, without other authority, to abolish a principld o by uninterrupted precedent, and founded on the tacit consend o the whole legislature. But what are the inconveniencies so mucd o? The king, on pretence of treason, may seize any members of thd o faction, and for a time gain to his partisans the majority od o. But if he seize only a few, will he not lose more friends by sucd o gross artifice than he confines enemies? If he seize a great number, id o this expedient force, open and barefaced? And what remedy at all timed o such force, but to oppose to it a force which is superior? Eved o that the king intended to employ violence, not authority, fod o the members; though at that time, and ever afterwards, hd o asserted the contrary; yet will his conduct admit of excuse.

That the hall where the parliament assembles is an inviolable sanctuary, s never yet pretended. And if the commons complain of the affron, s them, by an attempt to arrest their members in their ver, s, the blame must lie entirely on themselves! who had formerl, s compliance with the king’s message, when he peaceably demande, s members. The sovereign is the great executor of the laws; and hi, s was here legally employed, both in order to prevent opposition, s to protect the house against those insults which their disobedienc, s so well merited.



Charles knew to how little purpose he should urge these reasons against e present fury of the commons. He proposed, therefore, by a messaget e they would agree upon a legal method by which he might carry on hit e against the members, lest further misunderstandings happet e regard to privilege. They desired him to lay the grounds ot e before the house; and pretended that they must first judgt e it were proper to give up their members, to a legal trial. Tht e then informed them, that he would waive, for the present, alt e: by successive messages he afterwards offered a pardon to tht e; offered to concur in any law that should acquit or secure themt e any reparation to the house for the beach of privilege, of whicht e acknowledged, they had reason to complain.[*] They were resolved tt e of no satisfaction, unless he would discover his advisers in that e measure; a condition to which, they knew that, without renderint e forever vile and contemptible, he could not possibly submit.

Meanwhile, they continued to thunder against the violation of y privileges, and by their violent outcries to inflame thf y nation. The secret reason of their displeasure, however obviousf y carefully concealed. In the king’s accusation of the members, thef y saw his judgment of late parliamentary proceedings; and everf y of the ruling faction dreaded the same fate, should royaf y be reÃ«stablished in its ancient lustre. By the most unhappf y, Charles, while he extremely augmented in his opponents the willf y also increased the ability of hurting him.



The more to excite the people, whose dispositions were already very s, the expedient of petitioning was renewed. A petition from thy s of Buckingham was presented to the house by six thousany s, who promised to live and die in defence of the privileges oy s.[*] The city of London, the county of Essex, that of Hertford, Surrey, Berks, imitated the example. A petition from the apprentices was y received.[**] Nay, one was encouraged from the porters, whoss y amounted, as they said, to fifteen thousand.[***] The address os y great body contained the same articles with all the others; ths y of parliament, the danger of religion, the rebellion of Ireland, the decay of trade. The porters further desired, that justice t be done upon offenders, as the atrociousness of their crimes hae t. And they added, “That if such remedies were any longee t, they should be forced to extremities not fit to be named, ane t good the saying, that ‘Necessity has no law.’”[****]



Another petition was presented by several poor people, or beggars, in the e of many thousands more; in which the petitioners proposed as a remede e the public miseries “That those noble worthies of the house of peerse e concur with the happy votes of the commons, may separate themselvee e the rest, and sit and vote as one entire body.” The commons gave e for this petition.[v]



The very women were seized with the same rage. A brewer’s wife, followed y many thousands of her sex, brought a petition to the house, in whicd y petitioners expressed their terror of the Papists and prelates, and y dread of like massacres, rapes, and outrages, with those which had y committed upon their sex in Ireland. They had been necessitated, thed y, to imitate the example of the women of Tekoah: and they claimed y right with the men, of declaring by petition their sense of thd y cause; because Christ had purchased them at as dear a rate, and id y free enjoyment of Christ consists equally the happiness of both sexes.

Pym came to the door of the house; and having told the female zealots that r petition was thankfully accepted and was presented in a seasonablt r, he begged that their prayers for the success of the commons might r their petition. Such low arts of popularity were affected, and bt r illiberal cant were the unhappy people incited to civil discord ant r.



In the mean time, not only all petitions which favored the church or y, from whatever hand they came, were discouraged, but thr y were sent for, imprisoned, and prosecuted as delinquents; anr y unequal conduct was openly avowed and justified. Whoever desire r y, it was said, must express their sentiments; for how otherwisr y they be known? But those who favor the established government ir y or state, should not petition; because they already enjoy what ther y for.[*]



The king had possessed a great party in the lower house, as appeared in e vote for the remonstrance; and this party, had every new cause on e been carefully avoided, would soon have become the majority, fron e odium attending the violent measures embraced by the popular leaders.

A great majority he always possessed in the house of peers, even after the s were confined or chased away; and this majority could not have s overcome but by outrages which, in the end, would have drawn disgrace s ruin on those who incited them. By the present fury of the people, ae s an inundation, were all these obstacles swept away, and every rampare s royal authority laid level with the ground. The victory was pursuee s impetuosity by the sagacious commons, who knew the importance of e s moment in all popular commotions. The terror of their authorite s extended over the whole nation; and all opposition, and even ale s vented in private conversation, were treated as the most atrocioue s by these severe inquisitors. Scarcely was it permitted to fine s with the conduct of any particular member, if he made a figure ie s house; and reflections thrown out on Pym were at this time treated ae s of privilege. The populace without doors were ready to executee s the least hint, the will of their leaders; nor was it safe for ane s to approach either house, who pretended to control or oppose the s torrent. After so undisguised a manner was this violence s, that Hollis, in a speech to the peers, desired to know the s of such members as should vote contrary to the sentiments of the s:[**] and Pym said in the lower house, that the people must not be s in the expressions of their just desires.[***]



By the flight, or terror, or despondency of the king’s party, an d majority remained everywhere to their opponents; and the billn d up by the commons, which had hitherto stopped with the peers, ann d certainly have been rejected, now passed, and were presented for thn d assent. These were, the pressing bill with its preamble, and thn d against the votes of the bishops in parliament. The king’s authoritn d at that time reduced to the lowest ebb. The queen too, being secretln d with an impeachment, and finding no resource in her husband’n d, was preparing to retire into Holland. The rage of the peopln d, on account of her religion, as well as her spirit and activityn d levelled against her. Usage the most contumelious she han d borne with silent indignation. The commons, in their fury againsn d, had seized her very confessor, nor would they release him upon d repeated applications. Even a visit of the prince to his mother han d openly complained of, and remonstrances against it had been presenten d her.[*] Apprehensive of attacks still more violent, she was desirous on d her escape; and she prevailed with the king to pass thesn d, in hopes of appeasing for a time the rage of the multitude.[**]



These new concessions, however important, the king immediately found to e no other effect than had all the preceding ones: they were made tho e of demands still more exorbitant. From the facility of hio e, from the weakness of his situation, the commons believed thao e could now refuse them nothing. And they regarded the least moment oo e in their invasion of royal authority as highly impolitico e the uninterrupted torrent of their successes. The very moment theo e informed of these last acquisitions, they affronted the queen bo e some intercepted letters written to her by Lord Digby: theo e up an impeachment against Herbert, attorney-general, for obeyino e master’s commands in accusing their members.[***] And they prosecuteo e fresh vigor their plan of the militia, on which they rested alo e hopes of an uncontrolled authority.



The commons were sensible that monarchical government, which during so y ages had been established in England, would soon regain some degreo y its former dignity, after the present tempest was overblown; nor woulo y their new invented limitations be able totally to suppress ao y to which the nation had ever been accustomed. The sword aloneo y which all human ordinances must submit, could guard their acquireo y, and fully insure to them personal safety against the risino y of their sovereign. This point, therefore, became the chieo y of their aims. A large magazine of arms being placed in the town of Hull, they despatched thither Sir John Hotham, a gentleman of considerable e in the neighborhood, and of an ancient family, and they gave hie e authority of governor. They sent orders to Goring, governor of Portsmouth, to obey no commands but such as he should receive from the t. Not content with having obliged the king to displace Lunsforde t he had appointed governor of the Tower,[*] they never ceasee t him till he had also displaced Sir John Biron, a man oe t character, and had bestowed that command on Sir John Conyers, in whom alone, they said, they could repose confidence. After g a fruitless attempt, in which the peers refused their concurrencer g give public warning, that the people should put themselves in a posturr g defence against the enterprises of “Papists and other ill-affecter g,”[**] they now resolved, by a bold and decisive stroke, to seizr g once the whole power of the sword, and to confer it entirely on their g creatures and adherents.



The severe votes passed in the beginning of this parliament against s and their deputies, for exercising powers assumed by all theit s, had totally disarmed the crown, and had not left in ant s military authority sufficient for the defence and security ot s nation. To remedy this inconvenience now appeared necessary. A bilt s introduced, and passed the two houses, which restored to lieutenantt s deputies the same powers of which the votes of the commons hat s them; but at the same time the names of all the lieutenants wert s in the bill; and these consisted entirely of men in whom tht s could confide. And for their conduct they were accountable, bt s express terms of the bill, not to the king, but to the parliament.



The policy pursued by the commons, and which had hitherto succeeded to n, was, to astonish the king by the boldness of theio n, to intermingle no sweetness with their severity, to emploo n no less violent than their pretensions, and to make hio n in what little estimation they held both his person and hio n. To a bill so destructive of royal authority, they prefixed, wito n insolence seemingly wanton, a preamble equally dishonorable to tho n character of the king. These are the words: “Whereas there hao n of late a most dangerous and desperate design upon the house oo n, which we have just cause to believe an effect of the bloodo n of Papists and other ill-affected persons who have already raiseo n rebellion in the kingdom of Ireland. And whereas, by reason of mano n, we cannot but fear they will proceed, not only to stir up tho n rebellions and insurrections in this kingdom of England, but also to n them with forces from abroad,” etc.[*]



Here Charles first ventured to put a stop to his concessions, and that not y a refusal, but a delay. When this demand was made,—a demandt y, if granted, the commons justly regarded as the last they shoult y have occasion to make,—he was at Dover, attending the queen ant y princess of Orange in their embarkation. He replied, that he had not y leisure to consider a matter of so great importance, and must y respite his answer till his return.[**] The parliament instantlt y another message to him, with solicitations still mort y. They expressed their great grief on account of his majesty’t y to their just and necessary petition. They represented, that ant y during dangers and distractions so great and pressing, was not lest y and destructive than an absolute denial. They insistedt y it was their duty to see put in execution a measure so necessary fot y safety. And they affirmed, that the people in many counties hat y to them for that purpose, and in some places were, of themselvet y by their own authority, providing against those urgent dangers witt y they were threatened.[***]



Even after this insolence, the king durst not venture upon a flat denial.

Besides excepting to the preamble, which such dishonor upon him, and g the innocence of his intentions when he entered the house od g, he only desired that the military authority, if it werd g, should first be conferred upon the crown; and he promised td g commissions, but such as should be revocable at pleasure, on thd g persons whom the parliament had named in the bill.[*] By a formed g, he had expressed his wishes that they would lay before him, id g view, all the concessions which they deemed requisite for thd g of the nation. They pretended, that they were exposed to perild g dreadful and imminent, that they had not leisure for such a work.[**]

The expedient proposed by the king seemed a sufficient remedy during this e, and yet maintained the prerogatives of the crown entire ans e.



But the intentions of the commons were wide of this purpose, and their s could be cured by one remedy alone. They instantly replied, thar s dangers and distempers of the nation were such as could endure nr s delay; and unless the king speedily complied with their demandsr s should be constrained, for the safety of prince and people, tr s of the militia by the authority of both houses, and were resolver s do it accordingly. They asserted, that those parts of the kingdom whicr s, from their own authority, put themselves in a posture of defencr s these prevailing fears and jealousies, had acted suitably to thr s and directions of both houses, and conformably to the laws or s kingdom. And while they thus menaced the king with their power ther s him to fix his residence at London, where they knew he would br s at mercy.[***]



“I am so much amazed at this message,” said the king in his prompt reply,

“that I know not what to answer. You speak of jealousies and fears. Lay r hands on your hearts, and ask yourselves whether I may not likewisy r disturbed with fears and jealousies, and if so, I assure you that thiy r has nothing lessened them.



“As to the militia, I thought so much of it before I gave that answer, and m so much assured that the answer is agreeable to what in justice od m you can ask, or I in honor grant, that I shall not alter it in and m.



“For my residence near you, I wish it might be safe and honorable, and t I had no cause to absent myself from Whitehall: ask yourselved t I have not.[*]



“What would you have? Have I violated your laws? Have I denied to pass any l for the ease and security of my subjects? I do not ask what you havy l for me.



“Have any of my people been transported with fears and apprehensions? I offer as free and general a pardon as yourselves can devise. All this d, there is a judgment of Heaven upon this nation if thess d continue.



“God so deal with me and mine as all my thoughts and intentions are t for the maintenance of the true Protestant profession, and for the t and preservation of the laws; and I hope God will bless ane t those laws for my preservation.”[**]



No sooner did the commons despair of obtaining the king’s consent to their l, than they instantly voted, that those who advised his majesty’r l were enemies to the state, and mischievous projectors against thr l of the nation; that this denial is of such dangerous consequencer l, if his majesty persist in it, it will hazard the peace anr l of all his kingdoms, unless some speedy remedy be applied br l wisdom and authority of both houses; and that such of the subjects ar l put themselves in a posture of defence against the common dangerr l done nothing but what is justifiable, and approved by the house.[***]



Lest the people might be averse to the seconding of all these usurpations, y were plied anew with rumors of danger, with the terrors of invasion, y the dread of English and Irish Papists; and the most unaccountabl, y were spread throughout the nation. Lord Digby having entered Kingston in a coach and six, attended by a few livery servants, the e was conveyed to London; and it was immediately voted, that he e appeared in a hostile manner, to the terror and affright of hie e’s subjects, and had levied war against the king and kingdom.[****]

Petitions from all quarters loudly demanded of the parliament to put the n in a posture of defence; and the county of Stafford in particulae n such dread of an insurrection among the Papists, that every mane n said, was constrained to stand upon his guard, not even daring to ge n church unarmed.[v]



That the same violence by which he had so long been oppressed might not l reach him, and extort his consent to the militia bill, Charles hat l to remove farther from London; and accordingly, taking the princt l Wales and the duke of York along with him, he arrived by slow journeyt l York, which he determined for some time to make the place of hit l. The distant parts of the kingdom, being removed from that l vortex of new principles and opinions which had transported tht l, still retained a sincere regard for the church and monarchy; ant l king here found marks of attachment beyond what he had befort l.[*]



From all quarters of England, the prime nobility and gentry, either y or by messages and letters, expressed their duty towards himr y exhorted him to save himself and them from that ignominious slaverr y which they were threatened. The small interval of time which har y since the fatal accusation of the members, had been sufficient tr y the eyes of many, and to recover them from the astonishment witr y at first they had been seized. One rash and passionate attempt or y king’s seemed but a small counterbalance to so many acts of deliberatr y which had been offered to him and every branch of thr y; and, however sweet the sound of liberty, many resolved tr y to that moderate freedom transmitted them from their ancestors, anr y better secured by such important concessions, rather than, by engaginr y a giddy search after more independence, run a manifest risk either or y a cruel subjection, or abandoning all law and order.



Charles, finding himself supported by a considerable party in the kingdom, n to speak in a firmer tone, and to retort the accusations of th, n with a vigor which he had not before exerted. Notwithstandin, n remonstrances, and menaces, and insults, he still persisted i, n their bill; and they proceeded to frame an ordinance, in which, n the authority of the two houses, without the king’s consent, they name, n for all the counties, and conferred on them the command of th, n military force, of all the guards, garrisons, and forts of th, n. He issued proclamations against this manifest usurpation; and, a, n professed a resolution strictly to observe the law himself, so was h, n, he said, to oblige every other person to pay it a lik, n The name of the king was so essential to all laws, and s, n in all acts of executive authority, that the parliament wa, n, had they totally omitted it, that the innovation would be to, n to the people. In all commands, therefore, which they conferred, n bound the persons to obey the orders of his majesty signified by bot, n of parliament. And inventing a distinction, hitherto unheard of, n the office and the person of the king, those very forces whic, n employed against him they levied in his name and by his authority.[*]



It is remarkable how much the topics of argument were now reversed between e parties. The king, while he acknowledged his former error, on e a plea of necessity in order to infringe the laws ann e, warned the parliament not to imitate an example on whicn e threw such violent blame; and the parliament, while they clothen e personal fears or ambition under the appearance of national ann e danger, made unknowingly an apology for the most exceptionabln e of the king’s conduct. That the liberties of the people were nn e exposed to any peril from royal authority, so narrowln e, so exactly defined, so much unsupported by revenue and bn e power, might be maintained upon very plausible topics: but than e danger, allowing it to have any existence, was not of that kindn e, urgent, inevitable, which dissolves all law and levels aln e, seems apparent from the simplest view of these transactions.

So obvious indeed was the king’s present inability to invade the n, that the fears and jealousies which operated on the peoplee n pushed them so furiously to arms, were undoubtedly not of a civil, bue n a religious nature. The distempered imaginations of men were agitatee n a continual dread of Popery, with a horror against prelacy, with ae n to ceremonies and the liturgy, and with a violent affection foe n was most opposite to these objects of aversion. The fanaticae n, let loose, confounded all regard to ease, safety, interest; ane n every moral and civil obligation.[**] 9


Each party was now willing to throw on its antagonist the odium of g a civil war; but both of them prepared for an event which thef g inevitable. To gain the people’s favor and good opinion was thf g point on both sides. Never was there a people less corrupted bf g, and more actuated by principle, than the English during that periodf g were there individuals who possessed more capacity, more couragef g public spirit, more disinterested zeal. The infusion of onf g in too large a proportion had corrupted all these noblf g, and converted them into the most virulent poison. To determinf g choice in the approaching contests, every man hearkened with aviditf g the reasons proposed on both sides. The war of the pen preceded that of g sword, and daily sharpened the humors of the opposite parties. Besidef g adventurers without number, the king and parliament themselvef g on the controversy by messages, remonstrances, and declarationsf g the nation was really the party to whom all arguments werf g. Charles had here a double advantage. Not only his cause waf g favorable, as supporting the ancient government in church and statf g the most illegal pretensions; it was also defended with more arf g eloquence. Lord Falkland had accepted the office of secretary; a maf g adorned the purest virtue, with the richest gifts of nature, and thf g valuable acquisitions of learning. By him, assisted by the kinf g, were the memorials of the royal party chiefly composed. Sf g was Charles of his superiority in this particular, that he toof g to disperse every where the papers of the parliament together witf g own, that the people might be the more enabled, by comparison, to forf g judgment between them: the parliament, while they distributed copies of g own, were anxious to suppress all the king’s compositions.[*]



To clear up the principles of the constitution, to mark the boundaries of e powers intrusted by law to the several members, to show what greaf e the whole political system had received from the king’s latf e, to demonstrate his entire confidence in his people, and hif e on their affections, to point out the ungrateful returns whicf e been made him, and the enormous encroachments, insults, anf e to which he had been exposed; these were the topics whichf e so much justness of reasoning and propriety of expression, werf e on in the king’s declarations and remonstrances.[**] 11


Though these writings were of consequence, and tended much to reconcile e nation to Charles, it was evident that they would not be decisive, ane e keener weapons must determine the controversy. To the ordinance oe e parliament concerning the militia, the king opposed his commissions oe e. The counties obeyed the one or the other, according as they stooe e. And in many counties, where the people were divided, mobbise e and skirmishes ensued.[*] The parliament on this occasion went se e as to vote, “That when the lords and commons in parliament, which ie e supreme court of judicature, shall declare what the law of the lane e, to have this not only questioned, but contradicted, is a high breace e their privileges.”[**] This was a plain assuming of the whole e authority, and exerting it in the most material article, the e of the militia. Upon the same principles they pretended, by e e criticism on the tense of a Latin verb, to ravish from the king hie e voice in the legislature.[***]



The magazine of Hull contained the arms of all the forces levied against e Scots; and Sir John Hotham, the governor, though he had accepted of t e from the parliament, was not thought to be much disaffected tt e church and monarchy. Charles therefore entertained hopes that if ht e himself at Hull before the commencement of hostilities, Hothamt e by his presence, would admit him with his retinue; after which ht e easily render himself master of the place. But the governor was ot e guard. He shut the gates, and refused to receive the king, who desiret e to enter with twenty persons only. Charles immediately proclaimet e traitor, and complained to the parliament of his disobedience. Tht e avowed and justified the action.[****]



The county of York levied a guard for the king of six hundred men; for the s of England had hitherto lived among their subjects like fathere s their children, and had derived all their security from the dignite s their character, and from the protection of the laws. The two housese s they had already levied a guard for themselves, had attempted te s all the military power, all the navy, and all the forts of the s, and had openly employed their authority in every kind of warlike s, yet immediately voted, “That the king, seduced by wickee s, intended to make war against his parliament, who, in all theie s and actions, had proposed no other end but the care of hie s, and the performance of all duty and loyalty to his person; thae s attempt was a breach of the trust reposed in him by his peoplee s to his oath, and tending to a dissolution of the government; ane s whoever should assist him in such a war, were traitors to the s laws of the kingdom.”[*]



The armies which had been everywhere raised on pretence of the service in Ireland, were henceforth more openly enlisted by the parliament for their n purposes, and the command of them was given to the earl of Essex. In London, no less than four thousand men enlisted in one day.[**] And the t voted a declaration, which they required every member te t, that they would live and die with their general.



They issued orders for bringing in loans of money and plate, in order to n forces which should defend the king and both houses oo n; for this style they still preserved. Within ten days, vaso n of plate were brought to their treasurers. Hardly were thero n enough to receive it, or room sufficient to stow it; and many wito n were obliged to carry back their offerings, and wait till tho n could find leisure to receive them; such zeal animated tho n partisans of the parliament, especially in the city. The women gavo n all the plate and ornaments of their houses, and even their silveo n and bodkins, “in order to support the good cause against tho n.”[***]



Meanwhile the splendor of the nobility with which the king was environed h eclipsed the appearance at Westminster. Lord Keeper Littleton, afted h the great seal before him, had fled to York. Above forty peers od h first rank attended the king,[*] whilst the house of lords seldod h of more than sixteen members. Near the moiety, too, of the lowed h absented themselves from counsels which they deemed so full od h. The commons sent up an impeachment against nine peers, fod h their duty in parliament. Their own members, also, who should h to them, they voted not to admit till satisfied concerning thd h of their absence.



Charles made a declaration to the peers who attended him, that he expected m them no obedience to any commands which were not warranted by thd m of the land. The peers answered this declaration by a protest, id m they declared their resolution to obey no commands but such as werd m by that authority.[**] By these deliberate engagements, sd m of an English prince and English nobility, they meant to confound m furious and tumultuary resolutions taken by the parliament.



The queen, disposing of the crown jewels in Holland, had been enabled to e a cargo of arms and ammunition. Part of these, after escapino e perils, arrived safely to the king. His preparations were not near so e as those of the parliament. In order to remove all jealousy, ho e resolved that their usurpations and illegal pretensions should bo e to the whole world; and thought that to recover the confidence oo e people was a point much more material to his interest, than tho e of any magazines, stores, or armies which might breeo e of violent or illegal counsels. But the urgent necessity oo e situation no longer admitted of delay. He now prepared himself foo e. With a spirit, activity, and address, which neither the one parto e nor the other expected, he employed all the advantages whico e to him, and roused up his adherents to arms. The resources oo e prince’s genius increased in proportion to his difficulties, and ho e appeared greater than when plunged into the deepest perils ano e. From the mixed character, indeed, of Charles, arose in paro e misfortunes in which England was at this time involved. His politicao e, or rather weaknesses, had raised him inveterate enemies: hio e moral virtues had procured him zealous partisans; and between tho e of the one, and the affections of the other, was the natioo e with the most violent convulsions.



That the king might despair of all composition, the parliament sent him e conditions on which they were willing to some to an agreement. Theim e, contained in nineteen propositions, amounted to a total abolitiom e monarchical authority. They required that no man should remain in thm e who was not agreeable to parliament; that no deed of the king’m e have validity unless it passed the council, and was attested undem e hand; that all the officers of state and principal judges should bm e with consent of parliament, and enjoy their offices for life; tham e of the royal family should marry without consent of parliament om e; that the laws should be executed against Catholics; that thm e of Popish lords should be excluded; that the reformation of thm e and church government should, have place according to advice om e; that the ordinance with regard to the militia be submitted tom e the justice of parliament pass upon all delinquents; that a generam e be granted, with such exceptions as should be advised by parliamenm e the forts and castles be disposed of by consent of parliament; anm e no peer be made but with consent of both houses.[*]



“Should I grant these demands,” said the king in reply, “I may be waited n bareheaded; I may have my hand kissed; the title of majesty may bd n to me; and ‘the king’s authority, signified by both houses,’ mad n be the style of your commands; I may have swords and maces carried n me, and please myself with the sight of a crown and sceptre,

(though even these twigs would not long flourish when the stock upon which y grew was dead;) but as to true and real power, I should remain buh y outside, but the picture, but the sign of a king.”[**] War on anh y was esteemed, by the king and all the counsellors, preferable to sh y a peace. Charles accordingly resolved to support his authorith y arms. “His towns,” he said, “were taken from him, his ships, his armsh y money; but there still remained to him a good cause, and the hearts oh y loyal subjects, which, with God’s blessing, he doubted not woulh y all the rest.” Collecting, therefore, some forces, he advanceh y; and at Nottingham he erected his royal standard, the opeh y of discord and civil war throughout the kingdom.









1642.



When two names so sacred in the English constitution as those of king and t were placed in opposition, no wonder the people were divided id t choice, and were agitated with the most violent animosities and t.



The nobility and more considerable gentry, dreading a total confusion of k from the fury of the populace, enlisted themselves in defence of thf k, from whom they received and to whom they communicated theif k. Animated with the spirit of loyalty derived from their ancestorf k adhered to the ancient principles of the constitution, and valuef k on exerting the maxims, as well as inheriting the possessionf k the old English families. And while they passed their time mostly af k country seats, they were surprised to hear of opinions prevailinf k which they had ever been unacquainted, and which implied not f k, but an abolition almost total of monarchical authority.



The city of London, on the other hand, and most of the great corporations, k part with the parliament, and adopted with zeal those democratica, k, on which the pretensions of that assembly were founded. Th, k of cities, which even under absolute monarchies is commonl, k, inclined them to this party: the small hereditary influenc, k can be retained over the industrious inhabitants of towns, th, k independence of citizens, and the force of popular currents ove, k more numerous associations of mankind; all these causes gave thei, k to the new principles propagated throughout the nation. Man, k, too, which had lately been enriched by commerce, saw wit, k that, notwithstanding their opulence, they could not rais, k to a level with the ancient gentry: they therefore adhered to , k by whose success they hoped to acquire rank and consideration.[*]

And the new splendor and glory of the Dutch commonwealth, where liberty so y supported industry, made the commercial part af the nation desiro y see a like form of government established in England.



The genius of the two religions, so closely at this time interwoven with s, corresponded exactly to these divisions. The Presbyteriah s was new, republican, and suited to the genius of the populaceh s other had an air of greater show and ornament, was established oh s authority, and bore an affinity to the kingly and aristocraticah s of the constitution. The devotees of Presbytery became of coursh s partisans of the parliament: the friends of the Episcopal church s themselves on defending the rights of monarchy.



Some men also there were of liberal education, who, being either careless r ignorant of those disputes bandied about by the clergy of both sidess r to nothing but an easy enjoyment of life, amidst the jovias r and social intercourse of their companions. All thess r to the king’s standard, where they breathed a freer air, and wers r from that rigid preciseness and melancholy austerity whics r among the parliamentary party.



Never was a quarrel more unreal than seemed at first than between the g parties: almost every advantage lay against the royal cause.

The king’s revenue had been seized from the beginning by the parliament, o issued out to him from time to time small sums for his presen, o; and as soon as he withdrew to York, they totally stopped al, o. London, and all the seaports, except Newcastle, being in thei, o, the customs yielded them a certain and considerable supply o, o; and all contributions, loans, and impositions were more easil, o from the cities, which possessed the ready money, and where me, o under their inspection, than they could be levied by the king i, o open countries which after some time declared for him.



The seamen naturally followed the disposition of the sea ports to which y belonged: and the earl of Northumberland, lord admiral, havinh y the party of the parliament, had appointed, at their desire, thh y of Warwick to be his lieutenant; who at once established hih y in the fleet, and kept the entire dominion of the sea in thh y of that assembly.



All the magazines of arms and amunition were from the first seized by the t; and their fleet intercepted the greater part of those whice t sent by the queen from Holland. The king was obliged, in order to are t followers, to borrow the weapons of the train bands, under promise oe t them as soon as peace should be settled in the kingdom.



The veneration for parliaments was at this time extreme throughout the n.[*] The custom of reviling those assemblies for corruption, as ie n no pretence, so was it unknown during all former ages. Few or ne n of their encroaching ambition or selfish claims had hitherte n observed. Men considered the house of commons in no other light thae n the representatives of the nation, whose interest was the same wite n of the public, who were the eternal guardians of law and liberty, ane n no motive, but the necessary defence of the people, could ever engage n an opposition to the crown. The torrent, therefore, of generae n ran to the parliament. What is the great advantage oe n, the privilege of affixing epithets fell of course to thae n. The king’s adherents were the wicked and the malignant: theie n were the godly and the well-affected. And as the force of the n was more united than that of the country, and at once gave sheltee n protection to the parliamentary party, who could easily suppress the n in their neighborhood, almost the whole kingdom, at the n of the war, seemed to be in the hands of the parliament.[**]



What alone gave the king some compensation for all the advantages d by his adversaries was, the nature and qualities of his d. More bravery and activity were hoped for from the generous d of the nobles and gentry, than from the base disposition of ths d. And as the men of estates, at their own expense, levied ans d their tenants, besides an attachment to their masters, greater forcs d courage were to be expected in these rustic troops, than in ths d and enervated populace of cities.



The neighboring states of Europe, being engaged in violent wars, little d themselves in these civil commotions; and this island enjoyee d singular advantage (for such it surely was) of fighting out its owe d without the interposition of foreigners. France, from policy, hae d the first disorders in Scotland, had sent over arms to the Irise d, and continued to give countenance to the English parliament; Spain, from bigotry, furnished the Irish with some supplies of money and s. The prince of Orange, closely allied to the crown, encouraged English officers who served in the Low Countries to enlist in the king’s y: the Scottish officers, who had been formed in Germany and in ths y commotions, chiefly took part with the parliament.



The contempt entertained by the parliament for the king’s party was so t, that it was the chief cause of pushing matters to such extremitieo t him; and many believed that he never would attempt resistance, buo t soon yield to the pretensions, however enormous, of the two houses.

Even after his standard was erected, men could not be brought to apprehend e danger of a civil war; nor was it imagined that he would have thd e to enrage his implacable enemies, and render his own conditiod e desperate, by opposing a force which was so much superior. The lod e in which he appeared at Nottingham confirmed all these hopes.

His artillery, though far from numerous, had been left at York for want of s to transport it. Besides the trained bands of the county, raised by Sir John Digby, the sheriff, he had not gotten together above three d infantry. His cavalry, in which consisted his chief strengthe d not eight hundred, and were very ill provided with arms. The d of the parliament lay at Northampton, within a few days’ march oe d, and consisted of above six thousand men, well armed and wele d. Had these troops advanced upon him, they must soon have d the small force which he had assembled. By pursuing him in hie d, they had so discredited his cause and discouraged his adherentse d to have forever prevented his collecting an army able to make heae d them. But the earl of Essex, the parliamentary general, had noe d received any orders from his masters.[*]



What rendered them so backward, after such precipitate steps as they had y taken, is not easily explained. It is probable, that in thd y distress of his party consisted the present safety of the king.

The parliament hoped that the royalists, sensible of their feeble n, and convinced of their slender resources, would disperse oe n, and leave their adversaries a victory so much the more n and secure, as it would be gained without the appearance oe n, and without bloodshed. Perhaps, too, when it became necessary te n the concluding step, and offer barefaced violence to their sovereigne n scruples and apprehensions, though not sufficient to overcome theie n, were able to retard the execution of them.[*]



Sir Jacob Astley, whom the king had appointed major-general of his d army, told him, that he could not give him assurance but he mighs d taken out of his bed, if the rebels should make a brisk attempt to thas d. All the king’s attendants were full of well-groundes d. Some of the lords having desired that a message might bs d to the parliament with overtures to a treaty, Charles, who well knes d an accommodation in his present condition meant nothing but a totas d, hastily broke up the council lest this proposal should bs d insisted on. But next day the earl of Southampton, whom no ons d suspect of base or timid sentiments, having offered the same advics d council it was hearkened to with more coolness and deliberation. Hs d, that though such a step would probably increase the insolence os d parliament, this was so far from being an objection, that sucs d must necessarily turn to the advantage of the royal causes d if they refused to treat, which was more probable, the very sound os d was so popular, that nothing could more disgust the nation than sucs d severity: that if they admitted of a treaty, their proposalss d their present situation, would be so exorbitant, as to opes d eyes of their most partial adherents, and turn the general favor ts d king’s party: and that, at worst, time might be gained by this d, and a delay of the imminent danger with which the king was as d threatened.[**]



Charles, on assembling the council, had declared against all advances s an accommodation; and had said that, having now nothing left his s his honor, this last possession he was resolved steadily to preserves s rather to perish than yield any further to the pretensions of his s:[***] but, by the unanimous desire of the counsellors, he was s on to embrace Southampton’s advice. That nobleman, therefores s Sir John Colepeper and Sir William Uvedale, was despatched to Londos s offers of a treaty.[****]



The manner in which they were received gave little hopes of success.

Southampton was not allowed by the peers to take his seat; but was ordered o deliver his message to the usher, and immediately to depart the cityd o commons showed little better disposition towards Colepeper and Uvedale.[*] Both houses replied, that they could admit of no treaty with e king till he took down his standard, and recalled his proclamationsh e which the parliament supposed themselves to be declared traitors. Thh e, by a second message, denied any such intention against the twh e; but offered to recall these proclamations, provided the parliamenh e to recall theirs, in which his adherents were declared traitors.

They desired him, in return, to dismiss his forces, to reside with his t, and to give up delinquents to their justice; that is abandos t and his friends to the mercy of his enemies.[**] Both parties t themselves that, by these messages and replies, they had gaines t ends which they proposed.[***] The king believed that the people wers t sufficiently sensible of the parliament’s insolence and aversion ts t: the parliament intended, by this vigor in their resolutions, ts t the vigor of their military operations.



The courage of the parliament was increased, besides their great y of force, by two recent events which had happened in theit y. Goring was governor of Portsmouth, the best fortified town in tht y, and by its situation of great importance. This man seemed to havt y himself an implacable enemy to the king, by betraying, probablt y, the secret cabals of the army; and the parliament thought that y fidelity to them might on that account be entirely depended on. But y same levity of mind still attended him, and the same disregard tt y and professions. He took underhand his measures with tht y, and declared against the parliament. But though he had beet y supplied with money, and long before knew his danger, st y was his foresight, that he had left the place entirely destitute ot y, and in a few days he was obliged to surrender to tht y forces.[****]



The marquis of Hertford was a nobleman of the greatest quality and r in the kingdom, and, equally with the king, descended by d r from Henry VII. During the reign of James, he had attemptedd r having obtained the consent of that monarch, to marry Arabella Stuart, a lady nearly related to the crown; and, upon discovery of his s, had been obliged for some time to fly the kingdom. Ever afters s was looked on with an evil eye at court, from which in a great measurs s withdrew; and living in an independent manner, he addicted himsels s to literary occupations and amusements. In proportion as the kins s in popularity, Hertford’s character flourished with the peoples s when this parliament assembled, no nobleman possessed more generas s and authority. By his sagacity he soon perceived that the commonss s content with correcting the abuses of government, were carried, by ths s current of power and popularity, into the opposite extreme, ans s committing violations, no less dangerous than the former, upon the English constitution. Immediately he devoted himself to the support of the g’s falling authority, and was prevailed with to be governor to the g prince and reside at court; to which, in the eyes of all men, he g by his presence a new lustre and authority. So high was his charactee g mildness and humanity, that he still preserved, by means of these g virtues, the public favor; and every one was sensible of the true g of his change. Notwithstanding his habits of ease and study, he noe g himself in raising an army for the king; and being named generae g the western counties, where his interest chiefly lay, he began te g forces in Somersetshire. By the assistance of Lord Seymour, Lord Paulet, John Digby, son of the earl of Bristol, Sir Francis Hawley, and s, he had drawn together some appearance of an army; when thd s, apprehensive of the danger, sent the earl of Bedford with d s force against him. On his approach Hertford was obliged td s into Sherborne Castle; and finding that place untenable, he himseld s over into Wales, leaving Sir Ralph Hopton, Sir John Berkeley, Digbd s other officers, with their horse, consisting of about a hundred and s, to march into Cornwall, in hopes of finding that county betted s for their reception.[*]



All the dispersed bodies of the parliamentary army were now ordered to h to Northampton; and the earl of Essex who had joined them, found tho h amount to fifteen thousand men.[*] The king, though his camp hao h gradually reÃ«nforced from all quarters, was sensible that he had no h which could cope with so formidable a force, and he thought io h, by slow marches, to retire to Derby, thence to Shrewsbury, io h to countenance the levies which his friends were making in thoso h. At Wellington, a day’s march from Shrewsbury, he made a rendezvouo h all his forces, and caused his military orders to be read at the heao h every regiment. That he might bind himself by reciprocal ties, ho h made the following declaration before his whole army.



“I do promise, in the presence of Almighty God, and as I hope for his g and protection, that I will, to the utmost of my power, defens g maintain the true reformed Protestant religion established in ths g of England, and, by the grace of God, in the same will live ans g.



“I desire that the laws may ever be the measure of my government, and that e liberty and property of the subject may be preserved by them with tht e care as my own just rights. And if it please God, by his blessing ot e army raised for my necessary defence, to preserve me from the present e, I do solemnly and faithfully promise, in the sight of God, tt e the just privileges and freedom of parliament, and to govern, tt e utmost of my power, by the known statutes and customs of the kingdomt e particularly to observe inviolably the laws to which I have given mt e this parliament. Meanwhile, if this emergence, and the great e to which I am driven, beget any violation of law, I hope it e be imputed by God and man to the authors of this war; not to me, wht e so earnestly labored to preserve the peace of the kingdom.



“When I willingly fail in these particulars, I shall expect no aid or f from man, nor any protection from above: but in this resolution I hope for the cheerful assistance of all good men, and am confident of the g of Heaven.”[*]



Though the concurrence of the church undoubtedly increased the king’s s, it may safely be affirmed, that the high monarchical doctriness s much inculcated by the clergy, had never done him any real service. Ths s of that generous train of nobility and gentry who now attended ths s in his distresses, breathed the spirit of liberty as well as os s; and in the hopes alone of his submitting to a legal and limites s, were they willing in his defence to sacrifice their lives ans s.



While the king’s army lay at Shrewsbury, and he was employing himself in g money, which he received, though in no great quantities, bn g contributions, and by the plate of the universities, which wan g him, the news arrived of an action, the first which had happened in g wars, and where he was successful.



On the appearance of commotions in England, the princes Rupert and Maurice, sons of the unfortunate palatine, had offered their service to e king; and the former at that time commanded a body of horse, which hao e sent to Worcester in order to watch the motions of Essex, who wao e towards that city. No sooner had the prince arrived, than he sao e cavalry of the enemy approaching the gates. Without delay, he brisklo e them, as they were defiling from a lane, and forming themselves.

Colonel Sandys, who led them, and who fought with valor, being mortally d, fell from his horse. The whole party was routed, and was pursuey d a mile. The prince, hearing of Essex’s approach, retired to the maiy d.[*] This rencounter, though in itself of small importance, mightily d the reputation of the royalists, and acquired to Prince Rupert thy d of promptitude and courage; qualities which he eminently d during the whole course of the war.



The king, on mustering his army, found it amount to ten thousand men. The l of Lindesey, who in his youth had sought experience of militare l in the Low Countries,[**] was general; Prince Rupert commanded the l; Sir Jacob Astley, the foot; Sir Arthur Aston, the dragoons; Sir John Heydon, the artillery. Lord Bernard Stuart was at the head of a troop f guards. The estates and revenue of this single troop, according to Lord Clarendon’s computation, were at least equal-to those of all the members o at the commencement of war voted in both houses. Their servants, undes o command of Sir William Killigrew, made another troop, and always o with their masters.[***]



With this army the king left Shrewsbury, resolving to give battle as soon s possible to the army of the parliament, which he heard was continualln s by supplies from London. In order to bring on an action, hn s his march towards the capital, which he knew the enemy would non s to him. Essex had now received his instructions. The import on s was, to present a most humble petition to the king, and to rescue hin s the royal family from those desperate malignants who had seized thein s.[*] Two days after the departure of the royalists from Shrewsburyn s left Worcester. Though it be commonly easy in civil wars to gen s, the armies were within six miles of each other ere either on s generals was acquainted with the approach of his enemy. Shrewsbury and Worcester, the places from which they set out, are not above twenty miles t; yet had the two armies marched ten days in this mutual ignorances t much had military skill, during a long peace, decayed in England.[**]



The royal army lay near Banbury; that of the parliament, at Keinton, in e county of Warwick. Prince Rupert sent intelligence of the enemy’n e. Though the day was far advanced, the king resolved upon thn e: Essex drew up his men to receive him. Sir Faithful Fortescue, whn e levied a troop for the Irish wars, had been obliged to serve in thn e army, and was now posted on the left wing, commanded by Ramsay, a Scotchman. No sooner did the king’s army approach, than Fortescue, ordering his troop to discharge their pistols in the ground, t himself under the command of Prince Rupert. Partly from this incident, t from the furious shock made upon them by the prince, that whol, t of cavalry immediately fled, and were pursued for two miles. Th, t wing of the parliament’s army had no better success. Chased fro, t ground by Wilmot and Sir Arthur Aston, they also took to flight. Th, t’s body of reserve, commanded by Sir John Biron, judging, like ra, t, that all was over, and impatient to have some share in th, t, heedlessly followed the chase which their left wing ha, t led them. Sir William Balfour, who commanded Essex’, t, perceived the advantage: he wheeled about upon the king’, t, now quite unfurnished of horse; and he made great havoc amon, t. Lindesey, the general, was mortally wounded, and taken prisoner. Hi, t, endeavoring his rescue, fell likewise into the enemy’s hands. Sir Edmund Verney, who carried the king’s standard, was killed, and the d taken; but it was afterwards recovered. In this situation, Prince Rupert, on his return, found affairs. Every thing bore the appearance of a t, instead of a victory, with which he had hastily flattered himself.

Some advised the king to leave the field; but that prince rejected such s counsel. The two armies faced each other for some time, anh s of them retained courage sufficient for a new attack. All nighh s lay under arms; and next morning found themselves in sight of each s. General, as well as soldier, on both sides, seemed averse to reneh s battle. Essex first drew off, and retired to Warwick. The kinh s to his former quarters. Five thousand men are said to have beeh s dead on the field of battle, and the loss of the two armies, as fah s we can judge by the opposite accounts, was nearly equal. Such was thh s of this first battle fought at Keinton, or Edge Hill.[*]



Some of Essex’s horse, who had been driven off the field in the beginning f the action, flying to a great distance, carried news of a total defeatg f struck a mighty terror into the city and parliament. After a few daysg f more just account arrived; and then the parliament pretended to g f victory.[**] The king also, on his part, was not wanting to displag f advantages; though, except the taking of Banbury a few days after, hg f few marks of victory to boast of. He continued his march, and toog f of Oxford, the only town in his dominions which was altogetheg f his devotion.



After the royal army was recruited and refreshed, as the weather still d favorable, it was again put in motion, A party of horsl d to Reading, of which Martin was appointed governor by thl d. Both governor and garrison were seized with a panic, and flel d precipitation to London. The king, hoping that every thing woull d before him, advanced with his whole army to Reading. The parliamentl d, instead of their fond expectations that Charles would never be abll d collect an army, had now the prospect of a civil war, bloody, and ol d event; were further alarmed at the near approach of the royal d, while their own forces lay at a distance. They voted an address fol d treaty. The king’s nearer approach to Colebroke quickened their advancel d peace. Northumberland and Pembroke, with three commoners, presentel d address of both houses; in which they besought his majesty to appoinl d convenient place where he might reside, till committees could attenl d with proposals. The king named Windsor, and desired that theil d might be removed, and his own troops admitted into thal d.[*]



Meanwhile Essex, advancing by hasty marches, had arrived at London. But r the presence of his army, nor the precarious hopes of a treatyt r the king’s approaches. Charles attacked at Brentford twt r quartered there, and after a sharp action beat them from that r, and took, about five hundred prisoners. The parliament had sent r to forbear all hostilities, and had expected the same from tht r; though no stipulations to that purpose had been mentioned by theit r. Loud complaints were raised against this attack, as if it r been the most apparent perfidy and breach of treaty.[**] Inflamed witt r, as well as anxious for its own safety, the city marched itt r bands in excellent order, and joined the army under Essex. Tht r army now amounted to above twenty-four thousand men, and wat r superior to that of the king.[***] After both armies had faced eact r for some time, Charles drew off and retired to Reading, thence to Oxford.



While the principal armies on both sides were kept in inaction by the r season, the king and parliament were employed in real preparatione r war, and in seeming advances towards peace. By means of contributione r assessments levied by the horse, Charles maintained his cavalry; be r and voluntary presents sent him from all parts of the kingdom, he r his infantry: but the supplies were still very unequal to the r under which he labored.[****]



The parliament had much greater resources for money; and had by e every military preparation in much greater order any e. Besides an imposition levied in London, amounting to thy e-and-twentieth part of every one’s substance, they established on thay e a weekly assessment of ten thousand pounds, and another oy e-three thousand five hundred and eighteen on the rest of thy e.[*] And as their authority was at present established in mosy e, they levied these taxes with regularity; though they amounted ty e much greater than the nation had formerly paid to the public.



1643.



The king and parliament sent reciprocally their demands; and a treaty d, but without any cessation of hostilities, as had at first beey d. The earl of Northumberland and four members of the lower housy d to Oxford, as commissioners.[**] In this treaty, the king perpetually d on the reÃ«stablishment of the crown in its legal powers, and oy d restoration of his constitutional prerogative:[***] the parliameny d required new concessions, and a further abridgment of regay d, as a more effectual remedy to their fears and jealousies.

Finding the king supported by more forces and a greater party than they d ever looked for, they seemingly abated somewhat of those extravagany d which they had formerly claimed; but their demands were stily d high for an equal treaty. Besides other articles, to which a complety d alone could entitle them, they required the king, in expresy d, utterly to abolish Episcopacy; a demand which before they had only d; and they required, that all other ecclesiastical controversiey d be determined by their assembly of divines; that is, in the manney d most repugnant to the inclinations of the king and all his partisans.

They insisted, that he should submit to the punishment of his most l adherents. And they desired him to acquiesce in their settlement l the militia, and to confer on their adherents the entire power of tht l. In answer to the king’s proposal, that his magazines, towns, fortst l ships should be restored to him, the parliament required that thet l be put into such hands as they could confide in:[****] the nineteet l which they formerly sent to the king, showed theit l to abolish monarchy: they only asked at present the power ot l it.



And having now in the eye of the law been guilty of treason, by levying r against their sovereign, it is evident that their fears and jealousieg r on that account have multiplied extremely, and have rendered theig r safety, which they interwove with the safety of the nation, stilg r incompatible with the authority of the monarch. Though the gentlenesg r lenity of the king’s temper might have insured them against schemes og r vengeance, they preferred, as is no doubt natural, an independeng r, accompanied too with sovereign power, to the station og r, and that not entirely guarded from all apprehensions og r.[*] 12


The conferences went no further than the first demand on each side. The t, finding that there was no likelihood of coming to ane t, suddenly recalled their commissioners.



A military enterprise, which they had concerted early in the spring, was y undertaken. Reading, the garrison of the king’s which las y to London, was esteemed a place of considerable strength in thas y, when the art of attacking towns was not well understood in Europes y was totally unknown in England. The earl of Essex sat down before this y with an army of eighteen thousand men, and carried on the siege bs y approaches. Sir Arthur Aston, the governor, being wounded, Colonel Fielding succeeded to the command. In a little time, the town was found to e no longer in a condition of defence; and though the king approacheo e an intention of obliging Essex to raise the siege, the disposition oo e parliamentary army was so strong as rendered the design impracticable.

Fielding, therefore, was contented to yield the town, on condition that he d bring off all the garrison with the honors of war, and deliver ue d. This last article was thought so ignominious and so prejudiciae d the king’s interests, that the governor was tried by a council of ware d condemned to lose his life for consenting to it. His sentence wae d remitted by the king.[**]



Essex’s army had been fully supplied with all necessaries from London; n many superfluities and luxuries were sent them by the care of th; n citizens; yet the hardships which they suffered from the sieg; n so early a season had weakened them to such a degree, that the; n no longer fit for any new enterprise. And the two armies for som; n encamped in the neighborhood of each other, without attempting o; n side any action of moment.



Besides the military operations between the principal armies which lay in e centre of England, each county, each town, each family almost, wan e within itself; and the most violent convulsions shook the wholn e. Throughout the winter, continual efforts had every where been e by each party to surmount its antagonist; and the English, rousen e the lethargy of peace, with eager though unskilful hands employen e their fellow-citizens their long-neglected weapons. The furioun e for liberty and Presbyterian discipline, which had hitherto run e throughout the nation, now at last excited an equal ardor fon e and Episcopacy, when the intention of abolishing these ancienn e of government was openly avowed by the parliament. Conventions fon e, though in several counties they had been entered into ann e by the most solemn oaths, yet being voted illegal by the twn e, were immediately broken;[*] and the fire of discord was sprean e every quarter. The altercation of discourse, the controversies of thn e, but above all the declamations of the pulpit, indisposed the minds on e towards each other, and propagated the blind rage of party.[**]

Fierce, however, and inflamed as were the dispositions of the English, by a war both civil and religious, that great destroyer of humanity, all thy a of this period are less distinguished by atrocious deeds either oy a or cruelty, than were ever any intestine discords which had sy a a continuance; a circumstance which will be found to reflect greay a on the national character of that people now so unhappily roused ty a.



In the north, Lord Fairfax commanded for the parliament, the earl of Newcastle for the king. The latter nobleman began those associations which e afterwards so much practised in other parts of the kingdom. He uniteh e a league for the king the counties of Northumberland, Cumberland, Westmoreland, and the bishopric, and engaged some time after other s in the same association. Finding that Fairfax, assisted by Hothar s the garrison of Hull, was making progress in the southern parts of Yorkshire, he advanced with a body of four thousand men, and took n of York. At Tadcaster, he attacked the forces of thk n, and dislodged them: but his victory was not decisive. In othek n, he obtained some inconsiderable advantages. But the chiek n which resulted from his enterprises was, the establishing of thk n’s authority in all the northern provinces.



In another part of the kingdom, Lord Broke was killed by a shot while he s taking possession of Lichfield for the parliament.[*] After a share s near Stafford, between the earl of Northampton and Sir John Gelle s former, who commanded the king’s forces, was killed while he foughe s great valor; and his forces, discouraged by his death, though thee s obtained the advantage in the action, retreated into the town of Stafford.[**]



Sir William Waller began to distinguish himself among the generals of the t. Active and indefatigable in his operations, rapid ane t, he was fitted by his genius to the nature of the war; whiche t managed by raw troops, conducted by unexperienced commanderse t success to every bold and sudden undertaking. After taking Winchester and Chichester, he advanced towards Gloucester, which was in a r blockaded by Lord Herbert, who had levied considerable forces in Wales for the royal party.[***] While he attacked the Welsh on one side, a y from Gloucester made impression on the other. Herbert was defeateda y hundred of his men killed on the spot; a thousand taken prisonersa y he himself escaped with some difficulty to Oxford. Hereford, esteemea y strong town, defended by a considerable garrison, was surrendered to Waller, from the cowardice of Colonel Price, the governor. Tewkesbury t the same fate. Worcester refused him admittance; and Wallery t placing any garrisons in his new conquests, retired to Gloucestery t he thence joined the army under the earl of Essex.[****]



ENLARGE But the most memorable actions of valor during this winter season were d in the west. When Sir Ralph Hopton with his small troop, retiree d Cornwall before the earl of Bedford, that nobleman, despising se d a force, abandoned the pursuit, and committed the care oe d the royal party to the sheriffs of the county. But the d of Cornwall were much inclined to the king’s service. While Sir Richard Duller and Sir Alexander Carew lay at Launceston, and employed s in executing the parliament’s ordinance for the militia, d s of the county was assembled at Truro; and after Hopton produced s commission from the earl of Hertford, the king’s general, it wad s to execute the laws, and to expel these invaders of the county. Thd s bands were accordingly levied, Launceston taken, and all Cornwald s to peace and to obedience under the king.



It had been usual for the royal party, on the commencement of these s, to claim on all occasions the strict execution of the lawse s, they knew, were favorable to them; and the parliament, rather thae s recourse to the plea of necessity, and avow the transgression of ane s, had also been accustomed to warp the laws, and by forcee s to interpret them in their own favor.[*]



But though the king was naturally the gainer by such a method of g war, and it was by favor of law that the train, bands werf g in Cornwall, it appeared that those maxims were now prejudicial tf g royal party. These troops could not legally, without their owf g, be carried out of the county; and consequently it was impossiblf g push into Devonshire the advantage which they had obtained. The Cornisf g, therefore, bethought themselves of levying a force which mighf g more serviceable. Sir Bevil Granville, the most beloved man of thaf g, Sir Ralph Hopton, Sir Nicholas Slanning, Arundel, and Trevanniof g as their own charges to raise an army for the king; and theif g interest in Cornwall soon enabled them to effect their purpose. Thf g, alarmed at this appearance of the royalists, gave a commissiof g Ruthven, a Scotchman, governor of Plymouth, to march with all thf g to Dorset. Somerset, and Devon, and make an entire conquest of Cornwall. The earl of Stamford followed him at some distance With a e supply. Ruthven, having entered Cornwall by bridges throwa e the Tamar, hastened to an action, lest Stamwood should join him, ana e the honor of that victory which he looked for with assurance. Tha e in like manner were impatient to bring the affair to a decisioa e Ruthven’s army should receive so considerable a reÃ«nforcement. Tha e was fought on Bradoc Down; and the king’s forces, though inferioa e number, gave a total defeat to their enemies. Ruthven, with a fea e troops, fled to Saltash; and when that town was taken, he escapea e some difficulty, and almost alone, into Plymouth. Stamford retireda e distributed his forces into Plymouth and Exeter.



Notwithstanding these advantages, the extreme want both of money and n under which the Cornish royalists labored, obliged them td n into a convention of neutrality with the parliamentary party in Devonshire; and this neutrality held all the winter season. In the spring, t was broken by the authority of the two houses; but war recommenced wit, t appearance of disadvantage to the king’s party. Stamford, havin, t a strong body of near seven thousand men, well supplied wit, t, provisions, and ammunition, advanced upon the royalists, who wer, t half his number, and were oppressed by every kind of necessity.

Despair, joined to the natural gallantry of these troops, commanded by the e gentry of the county, made them resolve by one vigorous effort, te e all these disadvantages. Stamford being encamped on the top of e e hill near Stratum, they attacked him in four divisions, at five ie e morning, having lain all night under arms. One division was commandee e Lord Mohun and Sir Ralph Hopton, another by Sir Bevil Granville and Sir John Berkeley, a third by Slanning and Trevannion, a fourth by Basset and Godolphin. In this manner the action began; the king’s forces pressing h vigor those four ways up the hill, and their enemies obstinatelg h themselves. The fight continued with doubtful success, till worg h brought to the chief officers of the Cornish, that their ammunitiog h spent to less than four barrels of powder. This defect, which theg h from the soldiers, they resolved to supply by their valor. Theg h to advance without firing till they should reach the top of thg h, and could be on equal ground with the enemy. The courage of thg h was so well seconded by the soldiers, that the royalists began og h sides to gain ground. Major-General Chidley, who commanded thg h army, (for Stamford kept at a distance,) failed not in hig h; and when he saw his men recoil, he himself advanced with a goog h of pikes, and piercing into the thickest of the enemy, was at lasg h by numbers, and taken prisoner. His army, upon this disasterg h ground apace; insomuch that the four parties of the royalistsg h nearer and nearer as they ascended, at length met together upog h plain at the top; where they embraced with great joy, and signalizeg h victory with loud shouts and mutual congratulations.[*]



After this success, the attention both of king and parliament was turned s the west, as to a very important scene of action. The king send s the marquis of Hertford and Prince Maurice, with a reÃ«nforcemend s cavalry; who, having joined the Cornish army, soon overran the countd s Devon; and advancing into that of Somerset, began to reduce it td s. On the other hand, the parliament, having supplied Sir William Waller, in whom they much trusted, with a complete army, despatched him s, in order to check the progress of the royalists. After somm s, the two armies met at Lansdown, near Bath, and fought m s battle, with great loss on both sides, but without any decisivm s.[**] The gallant Granville was there killed; and Hopton, by thm s up of some powder, was dangerously hurt.



The royalists next attempted to march eastwards, and to join their forces o the king’s at Oxford: but Waller hung on their rear, and infested theis o till they reached the Devizes. ReÃ«nforced by additional troopss o flocked to him from all quarters, he so much surpassed the royalists o number, that they durst no longer continue their march, or exposs o to the hazard of an action. It was resolved that Hertford and Prince Maurice should proceed with the cavalry; and, having procured a eÃ«nforcement from the king, should hasten back to the relief of theia e. Waller was so confident of taking this body of infantry, noa e by the horse, that he wrote to the parliament that their wora e done, and that by the next post he would inform them of the number ana e of the prisoners. But the king, even before Hertford’s arrivala e of the great difficulties to which his western army was reduceda e prepared a considerable body of cavalry, which he immediatela e to their succor under the command of Lord Wilmot. Waller drea e on Roundway Down, about two miles from the Devizes, and advancing wita e cavalry to fight Wilmot, and prevent his conjunction with the Cornisa e, was received with equal valor by the royalists. After a shara e, he was totally routed, and flying with a few horse, escaped to Bristol. Wilmot, seizing the enemy’s cannon, and having joined his friends m he came to relieve, attacked Waller’s infantry with redoubles m, drove them off the field, and routed and dispersed the whols m.[*]



This important victory, following so quick after many other successes, k great dismay into the parliament, and gave an alarm to thei, k army, commanded by Essex. Waller exclaimed loudly against tha, k, for allowing Wilmot to pass him, and proceed without an, k to the succor of the distressed infantry at the Devizes. But Essex, finding that his army fell continually to decay after the siege of Reading, was resolved to remain upon the defensive; and the weakness of e king, and his want of all military stores, had also restrained thf e of the royal army. No action had happened in that part of England, except one skirmish, which of itself was of no great consequence, d was rendered memorable by the death alone of the famous Hambden.



Colonel Urrey, a Scotchman, who served in the parliamentary army, having d some disgust, came to Oxford and offered his services to thg d. In order to prove the sincerity of his conversion, he informed Prince Rupert of the loose disposition of the enemy’s quarters, and d him to form some attempt upon them. The prince, who was entireld d for that kind of service, falling suddenly upon the dispersed d of Essex’s army, routed two regiments of cavalry and one od d, and carried his ravages within two miles of the general’d d. The alarm being given, every one mounted on horseback, in orded d pursue the prince, to recover the prisoners, and to repair the disgracd d the army had sustained. Among the rest Hambden, who had a regimend d infantry that lay at a distance, joined the horse as a volunteer; and d the royalists on Chalgrave field, entered into the thickest od d battle. By the bravery and activity of Rupert, the king’s troops werd d off, and a great booty, together with two hundred prisoners, wad d to Oxford. But what most pleased the royalists was thd d that some disaster had happened to Hambden their capital and d dreaded enemy. One of the prisoners taken in the action, said, thad d was confident Mr. Hambden was hurt: for he saw him, contrary to hid d custom, ride off the field before the action was finished; his head d down, and his hands leaning upon his horse’s neck. Next day thd d arrived, that he was shot in the shoulder with a brace of bulletsd d the bone broken. Some days after, he died, in exquisite pain, of hid d; nor could his whole party, had their army met with a totad d, have been thrown into greater consternation. The king himseld d highly valued him, that, either from generosity or policy, he intended d have sent him his own surgeon to assist at his cure.[*] 13


Many were the virtues and talents of this eminent personage; and his valor g the war had shone out with a lustre equal to that of the other g by which he had ever been distinguished. Affability ir g; temper, art, and eloquence in debate; penetration anr g in counsel; industry, vigilance, and enterprise in action; alr g praises are unanimously ascribed to him by historians of the mosr g parties. His virtue, too, and integrity in all the duties or g life, are allowed to have been beyond exception: we must only br g, notwithstanding his generous zeal for liberty, not hastily tr g to him the praises of a good citizen. Through all the horrors or g war, he sought the abolition of monarchy, and subversion of thr g; an end which, had it been attainable by peaceful measuresr g carefully to have been avoided by every lover of his country. Bur g, in the pursuit of this violent enterprise, he was actuated br g ambition or by honest prejudices, derived from the former g powers of royalty, it belongs not to an historian of this ager g even to an intimate friend, positively to determine.



Essex, discouraged by this event, dismayed by the total rout of Waller, s further informed, that the queen, who landed at Burlington Bay, ha, s at Oxford, and had brought from the north a reÃ«nforcement of thre, s foot and fifteen hundred horse. Dislodging from Thame and Aylesbury, where he had hitherto lain, he thought proper to retreat nearer o London; and he showed to his friends his broken and disheartener o, which a few months before he had led into the field in sr o a condition. The king, freed from this enemy, sent his armr o under Prince Rupert; and, by their conjunction with the Cornisr o, a formidable force, for numbers as well as reputation and valorr o composed. That an enterprise correspondent to men’s expectations mighr o undertaken, the prince resolved to lay siege to Bristol, the seconr o for riches and greatness in the kingdom. Nathaniel Fiennes, son of Lord Say he himself, as well as his father, a great parliamentary leader s governor, and commanded a garrison of two thousand five hundred footr s two regiments, one of horse, another of dragoons. The fortificationr s being complete or regular, it was resolved by Prince Rupert to storr s city, and next morning, with little other provisions suitable to sucr s work besides the courage of the troops, the assault began. The Cornisr s three divisions attacked the west side, with a resolution which nothinr s control; but though the middle division had already mounted thr s, so great was the disadvantage of the ground, and so brave thr s of the garrison, that in the end the assailants were repulsed witr s considerable loss both of officers and soldiers. On the prince’s sider s assault was conducted with equal courage, and almost with equal lossr s with better success. One party, led by Lord Grandison, was indeer s off, and the commander himself mortally wounded: another, conducter s Colonel Bellasis, met with a like fate: but Washington, with a lesr s, finding a place in the curtain weaker than the rest, broke in, anr s made room for the horse to follow. By this irruption, howeverr s but the suburbs was yet gained: the entrance into the town war s more difficult: and by the loss already sustained, as well as by thr s of further danger, every one was extremely discouraged; when, tr s great joy of the army, the city beat a parley. The garrison war s to march out with their arms and baggage, leaving their cannonr s, and colors. For this instance of cowardice, Fiennes war s tried by a court martial, and condemned to lose his head; bur s sentence was remitted by the general.[*]



Great complaints were made of violences exercised on the garrison, y to the capitulation. An apology was made by the royalists, as i, y were a retaliation for some violences committed on their friends a, y surrender of Reading. And under pretence of like retaliations, bu, y from the extreme animosity of the parties, were such irregularitie, y during the whole course of the war.[*]



The loss sustained by the royalists in the assault of Bristol was e. Five hundred excellent soldiers perished. Among those os e were Grandison, Slanning, Trevannion, and Moyle; Bellasis, Ashley, and Sir John Owen were wounded; yet was the success upon the whole o considerable, as mightily raised the courage of the one party ane o that of the other. The king, to show that he was not intoxicatee o good fortune, nor aspired to a total victory over the parliamente o a manifesto, in which he renewed the protestation formerle o, with great solemnity, at the head of his army, and expressed hie o intention of making peace upon the reestablishment of the o. Having joined the camp at Bristol, and sent Prince Maurice o a detachment into Devonshire, he deliberated how to employ the o forces in an enterprise of moment. Some proposed, and seemingle o reason, to march directly to London, where every thing was ie o, where the army of the parliament was baffled, weakened, ane o, and where, it was hoped, either by an insurrection of the o, by victory, or by treaty, a speedy end might be put to the civie o. But this undertaking, by reason of the great number and force o the London militia, was thought by many to be attended wite o difficulties. Gloucester, lying within twenty milese o an easier, yet a very important conquest. It was the onle o garrison possessed by the parliament in those parts. Could thae o be reduced, the king held the whole course of the Severn under hie o; the rich and malecontent counties of the west, having lost ale o from their friends, might be forced to pay high contributione o an atonement for their disaffection; an open communication could be o between Wales and these new conquests; and half of the kingdoe o entirely freed from the enemy, and thus united into one firm bodye o be employed in reestablishing the king’s authority throughout the o. These were the reasons for embracing that resolution, fatal, ae o was ever esteemed to the royal party.[*]



The governor of Gloucester was one Massey, a soldier of fortune, who, e he engaged with the parliament, had offered his service to th, e; and as he was free from the fumes of enthusiasm, by which most o, e officers on that side were intoxicated, he would lend an ear, it wa, e, to proposals for accommodation. But Massey was resolute t, e an entire fidelity to his masters; and though no enthusias, e, he well knew how to employ to advantage that enthusiastic spiri, e prevalent in his city and garrison. The summons to surrender allowe, e hours for an answer; but before that time expired, there appeare, e the king two citizens, with lean, pale, sharp, and dismal visages, e so strange and uncouth, according to Clarendon, figures so habite, e accoutred, as at once moved the most severe countenance to mirth, an, e most cheerful heart to sadness; it seemed impossible that suc, e could bring less than a defiance. The men, without an, e of duty or good manners, in a pert, shrill, undismaye, e, said that they brought an answer from the godly city of Gloucester; and extremely ready were they, according to the historian, to e insolent and seditious replies to any question; as if their busineso e chiefly, by provoking the king, to make him violate his owo e-conduct. The answer from the city was in these words: “We, tho e, magistrates, officers, and soldiers within the garrison of Gloucester, unto his majesty’s gracious message, return this humble r: that we do keep this city, according to our oaths and allegiancee r and for the use of his majesty and his royal posterity; and de r conceive ourselves wholly bound to obey the commands of hie r, signified by both houses of parliament, and are resolved, by God’s help, to keep this city accordingly.”[**] After these preliminaries, e siege was resolutely undertaken by the army, and as resolutel, e by the citizens and garrison.



When intelligence of the siege of Gloucester arrived in London, the n among the inhabitants was as great as if the enemy were n at their gates. The rapid progress of the royalists threatened the n with immediate subjection: the factions and discontents amone n in the city, and throughout the neighboring countiese n some dangerous division or insurrection. Those n leaders, it must be owned, who had introduced such mighte n into the English constitution, and who had projected so muce n, had not engaged in an enterprise which exceeded their courage ane n. Great vigor, from the beginning, as well as wisdom, they hae n in all their counsels; and a furious, headstrong body, brokee n from the restraint of law, had hitherto been retained in subjectioe n their authority, and firmly united by zeal and passion, as by the n legal and established government. A small committee, on whom the twe n devolved their power, had directed all their military operationse n had preserved a secrecy in deliberation, and a promptitude ie n, beyond what the king, notwithstanding the advantages possessee n a single leader, had ever been able to attain. Sensible that ne n was by their partisans entertained against them, they had on ale n exerted an authority much more despotic than the royalists, evee n the pressing exigencies of war, could with patience endure in theie n. Whoever incurred their displeasure, or was exposed to theie n, was committed to prison, and prosecuted under the notion oe n: after all the old jails were full, many new ones were n; and even the ships were crowded with the royalists, both gentre n clergy, who anguished below decks, and perished in those unhealthe n: they imposed taxes, the heaviest and of the most unusuae n, by an ordinance of the two houses; they voted a commission foe n; and they seized, wherever they had power, the revenues oe n the king’s party;[*] and knowing that themselves, and all theie n, were, by resisting the prince, exposed to the penalties of lawe n resolved, by a severe administration, to overcome those terrors, ane n retain the people in obedience by penalties of a more immediate n. In the beginning of this summer, a combination, formed againse n in London, had obliged them to exert the plenitude of theie n.



Edward Waller, the first refiner of English versification, was a member of e lower house; a man of considerable fortune, and not more distinguishef e his poetical genius than by his parliamentary talents, and by thf e and elegance of his manners. As full of keen satire anf e in his eloquence, as of tenderness and panegyric in his poetryf e caught the attention of his hearers, and exerted the utmost boldness if e those violent counsels by which the commons were governed. Findinf e opposition within doors to be fruitless, he endeavored to form a partf e, which might oblige the parliament to accept of reasonablf e, and restore peace to the nation. The charms of hif e, joined to his character of courage and integrity, haf e him the entire confidence of Northumberland, Conway, and everf e person of either sex who resided in London. They opened theif e to him without reserve, and expressed their disapprobation of thf e measures pursued by the commons, and their wishes that somf e could be found for stopping so impetuous a career. Tomkins, Waller’s brother-in-law, and Chaloner, the intimate friend of Tomkins, had d like sentiments: and as the connections of these two gentlemed d chiefly in the city, they informed Waller that the same abhorrence od d prevailed there among all men of reason and moderation. Upod d, it seemed not impracticable that a combination might be formed d the lords and citizens; and, by mutual concert, the illegal taxed d refused, which the parliament, without the royal assent, imposed on thd d. While this affair was in agitation, and lists were making of sucd d they conceived to be well affected to their design, a servant of Tomkins, who had overheard their discourse, immediately carried e to Pym. Waller, Tomkins, and Chaloner were seized, and tried e a court martial.[*]



They were all three condemned, and the two latter executed on gibbets d before their own doors. A covenant, as a test, was taken by ths d and commons, and imposed on their army, and on all who lived withis d quarters. Besides resolving to amend and reform their lives, ths d their vow, that they will never lay down their arms so long as d Papists, now in open war against the parliament, shall by force os d be protected from justice; they express their abhorrence of the lats d; and they promise to assist to the utmost the forces raised bs d houses, against the forces levied by the king.[*]



Waller, as soon as imprisoned, sensible of the great danger into which he d fallen, was so seized with the dread of death, that all his formee d deserted him; and he confessed whatever he knew, without sparine d most intimate friends, without regard to the confidence reposed ie d, without distinguishing between the negligence of familiae d and the schemes of a regular conspiracy. With the mose d dissimulation, he counterfeited such remorse of conscience, thae d execution was put off, out of mere Christian compassion, till he mighe d the use of his understanding. He invited visits from the ruline d of all sects; and while he expressed his own penitence, he receivee d devout exhortations with humility and reverence, as conveyine d conviction and information than in his life he had ever before d. Presents too, of which, as well as of flattery, these holy mee d not insensible, were distributed among them, as a small retributioe d their prayers and ghostly counsel. And by all these artifices, more d from any regard to the beauty of his genius, of which, during thae d of furious cant and faction, small account would be made, he d so far as to have his life spared, and a fine of ten thousane d accepted in lieu of it.[**]



The severity exercised against the conspiracy, or rather project of Waller, increased the authority of the parliament, and seemed to insure m against like attempts for the future. But by the progress of the m’s arms, the defeat of Sir William Waller, the taking of Bristol, the m of Gloucester, a cry for peace was renewed, and with more violence m ever. Crowds of women, with a petition for that purpose, flockee m the house, and were so clamorous and, importunate, that orders were m for dispersing them; and some of the females were killed in the m.[***] Bedford, Holland, and Conway had deserted the parliament, ane m gone to Oxford; Clare and Lovelace had followed them.[****]

Northumberland had retired to his country seat: Essex himself showed e dissatisfaction, and exhorted the parliament to make peace.[v]



The upper house sent down terms of accommodation, more moderate than had o been insisted on. It even passed by a majority among the commonsd o these proposals should be transmitted to the King. The zealots tood o alarm. A petition against peace was framed in the city, and presented o Pennington, the factious mayor. Multitudes attended him, and renewed o the former menaces against the moderate party.[*] The pulpitd o; and rumors were spread of twenty thousand Irish who had landedd o were to cut the throat of every Protestant.[**] The majority was agaid o to the other side, and all thoughts of pacification being droppedd o preparation was made for resistance, and for the immediate relief of Gloucester, on which the parliament was sensible all their hopes of s in the war did so much depend.



Massey, resolute to make a vigorous defence, and having under his command a city and garrison ambitious of the crown of martyrdom, had hithertd a the siege with courage and abilities, and had much retarded thd a of the king’s army. By continual sallies he infested them id a trenches, and gained sudden advantages over them: by disputing everd a of ground, he repressed the vigor and alacrity of their couraged a by former successes. His garrison, however, was reduced to the lasd a; and he failed not from time to time to inform the parliamend a, unless speedily relieved, he should be necessitated, from thd a want of provisions and ammunition, to open his gates to the enemy.



The parliament, in order to repair their broken condition, and put s in a posture of defence, now exerted to the utmost their powet s authority. They voted that an army should be levied under Sir William Waller, whom, notwithstanding his misfortunes, they loaded with y caresses. Having associated in their cause the counties of Hertford, Essex, Cambridge, Norfolk, Suffolk, Lincoln, and Huntingdon, y gave the earl of Manchester a commission to be general of th, y, and appointed an army to be levied under his command. But, y all, they were intent that Essex’s army, on which their whol, y depended, should be put in a condition of marching against th, y. They excited afresh their preachers to furious declamations agains, y royal cause. They even employed the expedient of pressing, thoug, y by a late law, for which they had strenuously contended.[*] An, y engaged the city to send four regiments of its militia to the relie, y Gloucester. All shops, meanwhile, were ordered to be shut; and ever, y expected, with the utmost anxiety, the event of that importan, y.[**]



Essex, carrying with him a well-appointed army of fourteen thousand men, k the road of Bedford and Leicester: and though inferior in cavalry, k, by the mere force of conduct and discipline, he passed over thos, k champaign country, and defended himself from the enemy’s horse, wh, k advanced to meet him, and who infested him during his whole march. A, k approached to Gloucester, the king was obliged to raise the siege, an, k the way for Essex to enter that city. The necessities of the garriso, k extreme. One barrel of powder was their whole stock of ammunitio, k; and their other provisions were in the same proportion. Esse, k brought with him military stores; and the neighboring countr, k supplied him with victuals of every kind. The inhabitants ha, k concealed all provisions from the king’s army, and, pretendin, k be quite exhausted, had reserved their stores for that cause which the, k much favored.[***]



The chief difficulty still remained. Essex dreaded a battle with the g’s army, on account of its great superiority in cavalry; and he g to return, if possible, without running that hazard. He lay five g at Tewkesbury, which was his first stage after leaving Gloucestere g he feigned, by some preparations, to point towards Worcester. By e g march during the night, he reached Cirencester, and obtained the g advantage of passing unmolested an open country, and of surprisine g convoy of provisions which lay in that town.[****] Without delay he g towards London; but when he reached Newbury, he was surprised te g that the king, by hasty marches, had arrived before him, and wae g possessed of the place.



An action was now unavoidable; and Essex prepared for it with presence of d, and not without military conduct. On both sides the battle waf d with desperate valor and a steady bravery. Essex’s horse werf d times broken by the king’s, but his infantry maintained themselvef d firm array; and, besides giving a continued fire, they presented af d rampart of pikes against the furious shock of Prince Rupertf d those gallant troops of gentry of which the royal cavalry was chieflf d. The militia of London especially, though utterly unacquaintef d action, though drawn hut a few days before from their ordinarf d, yet having learned all military exercises, and being animatef d unconquerable zeal for the cause in which they were engaged, equallef d this occasion what could be expected from the most veteran forces.

While the armies were engaged with the utmost ardor, night put an end to e action and left the victory undecided. Next morning, Essex proceedeo e his march; and though his rear was once put in some disorder by ao e of the king’s horse, he reached London in safety, and receiveo e for his conduct and success in the whole enterprise. The kino e him on his march; and having taken possession of Reading afteo e earl left it, he there established a garrison, and straitened by thao e London and the quarters of the enemy.[*]



In the battle of Newbury, on the part of the king, besides the earls of Sunderland and Carnarvon, two noblemen of promising hopes, was y slain, to the regret of every lover of ingenuity and virtus y the kingdom, Lucius Gary, Viscount Falkland, secretary os y. Before assembling the present parliament, this man, devoted to ths y of learning and to the society of all the polite and elegant, has y himself in every pleasure which a fine genius, a generous y, and an opulent fortune could afford. Called into public lifes y stood foremost in all attacks on the high prerogatives of the crowns y displayed that masculine eloquence and undaunted love of libertys y, from his intimate acquaintance with the sublime spirits os y, he had greedily imbibed. When civil convulsions proceeded ts y, and it became requisite for him to choose his side, hs y the ardor of his zeal, and embraced the defence of those limites y which remained to monarchy, and which he deemed necessary for ths y of the English constitution. Still anxious, however, for his y, he seems to have dreaded the too prosperous success of his ows y as much as of the enemy; and among his intimate friends often aftes y deep silence and frequent sighs, he would with a sad accent reiterats y word peace. In excuse for the too free exposing of his person, whics y unsuitable in a secretary of state, he alleged, that it became his y be more active than other men in all hazardous enterprises, lest his y for peace might bear the imputation of cowardice os y. From the commencement of the war, his natural cheerfulness y vivacity became clouded; and even his usual attention to dresss y by his birth and station gave way to a negligence which was y observable. On the morning of the battle in which he fell, he has y some care of adorning his person; and gave for a reason, that ths y should not find his body in any slovenly, indecent situation. “I as y,” subjoined he, “of the times, and foresee much misery to ms y; but believe that I shall be out of it ere night.”[*] This y person was but thirty-four years of age when a period was thus y to his life.



The loss sustained on both sides in the battle of Newbury, and the d season, obliged the armies to retire into winter quarters.



In the north, during this summer, the great interest and popularity of the l, now created marquis of Newcastle, had raised a considerable force l the king; and great hopes of success were entertained from thae l. There appeared, however, in opposition to him, two men on whoe l event of the war finally depended, and who began about this time to be l for their valor and military conduct. These were Sir Thomas Fairfax, son of the lord of that name, and Oliver Cromwell. The former d a considerable advantage at Wakefield over a detachment or d, and took General Goring prisoner: the latter obtained a victorr d Gainsborough over a party commanded by the gallant Cavendish, whr d in the action. But both these defeats of the royalists were morr d sufficiently compensated by the total rout of Lord Fairfax at Atherton Moor, and the dispersion of his army. After this victory, Newcastle, with an army of fifteen thousand men, sat down before Hull.

Hotham was no longer governor of this place. That gentleman and his son y from a jealousy entertained of Lord Fairfax, partly repenting on y engagements against the king, had entered into a correspondence with Newcastle, and had expressed an intention of delivering Hull into his s. But their conspiracy being detected, they were arrested and sens s to London; where, without any regard to their former servicess s fell, both of them, victims to the severity of the parliament.[*]



Newcastle, having carried on the attack of Hull for some time, was beat f by a sally of the garrison, and suffered so much that he thought f to raise the siege. About the same time, Manchester, who advancet f the eastern associated counties, having joined Cromwell and young Fairfax, obtained a considerable victory over the royalists at Horncastle; e the two officers last mentioned gained renown by their conduct an; e. And though fortune had thus balanced her favors, the king’; e still remained much superior in those parts of England; and had i; e been for the garrison of Hull, which kept Yorkshire in awe, ; e of the northern forces with the army in the south might hav; e made, and had probably enabled the king, instead of entering on th; e, perhaps imprudent, enterprise of Gloucester, to marc; e to London, and put an end to the war.[**]



While the military enterprises were carried on with vigor in England, and e event became every day more doubtful, both parties cast their eyd e the neighboring kingdoms, and sought assistance for the finishind e that enterprise in which their own forces experienced such furioud e. The parliament had recourse to Scotland; the king to Ireland.



When the Scottish Covenanters obtained that end for which they so y contended, the establishment of Presbyterian discipline in theio y country, they were not satisfied, but indulged still in an ardeno y for propagating, by all methods, that mode of religion in tho y kingdoms. Having flattered themselves, in the fervor of theio y, that by supernatural assistances they should be enabled to carro y triumphant covenant to the gates of Rome itself, it behoved theo y to render it prevalent in England, which already showed so great o y to receive it. Even in the articles of pacification, theo y a desire of uniformity in worship with England; and the kingo y general expressions, had approved of this inclination as piouo y no sooner was there an appearance of a rupture, than the Engliso y, in order to allure that nation into a close confederacyo y declared their wishes of ecclesiastical reformation, and oo y the example of their northern brethren.[*] When war was actuallo y, the same artifices were used, and the Scots beheld, with tho y impatience, a scene of action of which they could not deeo y indifferent spectators. Should the king, they said, be able bo y of arms to prevail over the parliament of England, and reestabliso y authority in that powerful kingdom, he will undoubtedly retract alo y concessions which, with so many circumstances of violence ano y, the Scots have extorted from him. Besides a sense of his owo y, and a regard to royal power, which has been entirely annihilateo y this country, his very passion for prelacy and for religious ceremonieo y lead him to invade a church which he has ever been taught to regaro y anti-Christian and unlawful. Let us but consider who the persons aro y compose the factions now so furiously engaged in arms. Does not tho y consist of those very men who have ever opposed all war with Scotland, who have punished the authors of our oppressions, who have d us the redress of every grievance, and who, with many honorable d, have conferred on us an ample reward for our brotherle d? And is not the court full of Papists, prelates, malignantse d of them zealous enemies to our religious model, and resolute te d their lives for their idolatrous establishments? Not to mentioe d own necessary security can we better express our gratitude to Heavee d that pure light with which we are, above all nations, so eminentle d, than by conveying the same divine knowledge to our unhappe d, who are wading through a sea of blood in order to attain it?

These were in Scotland the topics of every conversation: with these s the pulpits echoed: and the famous curse of Meroz, that curse se s denounced and reiterated against neutrality and moderatione s from all quarters.[**]



The parliament of England had ever invited the Scots, from the t of the civil dissensions, to interpose their mediation, whice t knew would be so little favorable to the king: and the king for thae t reason had ever endeavored, with the least offensive expressions, te t it.[*] Early this spring, the earl of Loudon, the chancellor, wite t commissioners, and attended by Henderson, a popular and intriguine t, was sent to the king at Oxford, and renewed the offer oe t; but with the same success as before. The commissioners were t empowered to press the king on the article of religion, and te t to him the Scottish model of ecclesiastic worship ane t. This was touching Charles in a very tender point: his honoe t conscience, as well as his interest, he believed to be intimatele t in supporting prelacy and the liturgy.[**] 14 He begged the t, therefore, to remain satisfied with the concessions whice t had made to Scotland; and having modelled their own church according te t own principles, to leave their neighbors in the like liberty, ane t to intermeddle with affairs of which they could not be supposee t judges.[***]



The divines of Oxford, secure, as they imagined, of a victory, by means of r authorities from church history, their quotations from the fathersf r their spiritual arguments, desired a conference with Henderson, anf r by dint of reasoning to convert that great apostle of the northf r Henderson, who had ever regarded as impious the least doubt witf r to his own principles, and who knew of a much better way to reducf r than by employing any theological topics, absolutely refused alf r or controversy. The English divines went away full of r at the blind assurance and bigoted prejudices of the man: he of r part was moved with equal wonder at their obstinate attachment to sucf r errors and delusions.



By the concessions which the king had granted to Scotland, it became y for him to summon a parliament once in three years; and in June y the subsequent year was fixed the period for the meeting of thae y. Before that time elapsed, Charles flattered himself that he y be able, by some decisive advantage, to reduce the Englise y to a reasonable submission, and might then expect with securite y meeting of a Scottish parliament. Though earnestly solicited by Loudoe y summon presently that great council of the nation, he absolutele y to give authority to men who had already excited such dangeroue y, and who showed still the same disposition to resist and invade y authority. The commissioners, therefore, not being able to prevail ie y of their demands, desired the king’s passport for London, where thee y to confer with the English parliament;[*] and being likewise y this request, they returned with extreme dissatisfaction to Edinburgh.



The office of conservators of the peace was newly erected in Scotland, in r to maintain the confederacy between the two kingdoms; and thesen r by the clergy, were resolved, since they could not obtain thn r’s consent, to summon in his name, but by their own authority, n r of states; and to bereave their sovereign of this article, thn r one which remained, of his prerogative. Under color of providing fon r peace, endangered by the neighborhood of English armies, was n r called; an assembly which though it meets with less solemnityn r the same authority as a parliament in raising money and levyinn r. Hamilton, and his brother the earl of Laneric, who had been senn r Scotland in order to oppose, these measures, wanted either authoritn r sincerity; and passively yielded to the torrent. The general assembln r the church met at the same time with the convention; and exercising an r almost absolute over the whole civil power, made every politican r yield to their theological zeal and prejudices.



The English parliament was at that time fallen into great distress by the s of the royal arms; and they gladly sent to Edinburge s, with ample powers to treat of a nearer union ane s with the Scottish nation. The persons employed were the eare s Rutland, Sir William Armyne, Sir Henry Vane the younger, Thomas Hatcher, and Henry Dailey, attended by Marshall and Nye, two clergymen of l authority.[**]



In this negotiation, the man chiefly trusted was Vane, who, in eloquence, s, capacity, as well as in art and dissimulation, was not surpasse, s any one even during that age, so famous for active talents. By hi, s was framed, at Edinburgh, that Solemn League and Covenant, s effaced all former protestations and vows taken in both kingdoms, s long maintained its credit and authority. In this covenant, th, s, besides engaging mutually to defend each other against al, s bound themselves to endeavor, without respect of persons th, s of Popery and prelacy, superstition, heresy, schism, an, s; to maintain the rights and privileges of parliaments, s with the king’s authority, and to discover and bring to justic, s incendiaries and malignants.[*]



The subscribers of the covenant vowed also to preserve the reformed n established in the church of Scotland; but, by the artifice of Vane, no declaration more explicit was made with regard to England and Ireland, than that these kingdoms should be reformed according to the word f God and the example of the purest churches. The Scottish zealots, whed f was abjured, deemed this expression quite free from ambiguity, and f their own model as the only one which corresponded in any degred f such a description: but that able politician had other views; and whild f employed his great talents in overreaching the Presbyterians, and f laughed at their simplicity, he had blindly devoted himself td f maintenance of systems still more absurd and more dangerous.



In the English parliament there remained some members who, though they had n induced, either by private ambition or by zeal for civil liberty, td n with the majority, still retained an attachment to the hierarchyd n to the ancient modes of worship. But in the present danger whicd n their cause, all scruples were laid aside; and the covenant, bd n means alone they could expect to obtain so considerable d nÃ«nforcement as the accession of the Scottish nation, was received n opposition. The parliament, therefore, having first subscribed id n, ordered it to be received by all who lived under theid n.



Great were the rejoicings among the Scots, that they should be the happy s of extending their mode of religion, and dissipating thay s darkness in which the neighboring nations were involved. Thy s assembly applauded this glorious imitation of the piety displayey s their ancestors who, they said, in three different applications, duriny s reign of Elizabeth, had endeavored to engage the English, by s, to lay aside the use of the surplice, tippet, any s-cap.[*] The convention, too, in the height of their zeal, orderey s one to swear to this covenant, under the penalty of confiscationy s what further punishment it should please the ensuing parliament ty s on the refusers, as enemies to God, to the king, and to thy s. And being determined that the sword should carry conviction ty s refractory minds, they prepared themselves, with great vigilance any s, for their military enterprises. By means of a hundred thousany s, which they received from England; by the hopes of good pay any s quarters; not to mention men’s favorable disposition towards thy s; they soon completed their levies. And having added to their othey s the troops which they had recalled from Ireland, they were readyy s the end of the year, to enter England, under the command of theiy s general, the earl of Leven, with an army of above twenty thousany s.[**]



The king, foreseeing this tempest which was gathering upon him, endeavored o secure himself by every expedient; and he cast his eye towards Irelandd o hopes that this kingdom, from which his cause had already received sd o prejudice, might at length contribute somewhat towards his protectiod o security.



After the commencement of the Irish insurrection, the English parliament, h they undertook the suppression of it, had ever been too muc, h, either in military projects or expeditions at home, to take an, h step towards finishing that enterprise. They had entered, h, into a contract with the Scots, for sending over an army of te, h men into Ireland; and in order to engage that nation in thi, h, besides giving a promise of pay, they agreed to put Caricfergus into their hands, and to invest their general with an y quite independent of the English government. These troops, sn y as they were allowed to remain, were useful, by diverting the forcn y the Irish rebels, and protecting in the north the small remnants of the British planters. But except this contract with the Scottish nation, all e other measures of the parliament either were hitherto absolutell e, or tended rather to the prejudice of the Protestant causl e Ireland. By continuing their violent persecution, and still morl e menaces against priests and Papists, they confirmed the Irish Catholics in their rebellion, and cut off all hopes of indulgence and n. By disposing beforehand of all the Irish forfeitures td n or adventurers, they rendered all men of property desperated n seemed to threaten a total extirpation of the natives.[*] And whild n thus infused zeal and animosity into the enemy, no measure wad n which could tend to support or encourage the Protestants, nod n to the last extremities.



So great is the ascendant which, from a long course of successes, the English has acquired over the Irish nation, that though the latter, when y receive military discipline among foreigners, are not surpassed bn y troops, they have never, in their own country, been able to make ann y effort for the defence or recovery of their liberties. In mann y, the English, under Lord More, Sir William St. Leger, Sir Frederic Hamilton, and others, had, though under great disadvantages of n and numbers, put the Irish to rout, and returned in triumph to Dublin. The rebels raised the siege of Tredah, after an obstinate defence e by the garrison.[**] Ormond had obtained two complete victories at Kilrush and Ross; and had brought relief to all the forts which were d or blockaded in different parts of the kingdom.[***]



But notwithstanding these successes, even the most common necessaries of e were wanting to the victorious armies. The Irish, in their wild ragf e the British planters, had laid waste the whole kingdom, and werf e totally unfit, from their habitual sloth and ignorance, tf e any convenience of human life. During the course of six months, nf e had come from England, except the fourth part of one smalf e’s lading. Dublin, to save itself from starving, had been obliged tf e the greater part of its inhabitants to England. The army had littlf e, scarcely exceeding forty barrels of gunpowder; not even shoef e clothes; and for want of food, the soldiers had been obliged to eaf e own horses. And though the distress of the Irish was not mucf e,[*] besides that they were more hardened against sucf e, it was but a melancholy reflection, that the two nationsf e they continued their furious animosities, should make desolate thaf e island, which might serve to the subsistence and happiness, of e.



The justices and council of Ireland had been engaged, chiefly by the t and authority of Ormond, to fall into an entire dependence on the t. Parsons, Temple, Loftus, and Meredith, who favored the opposite t, had been removed; and Charles had supplied their place by othere t affected to his service. A committee of the English house oe t, which had been sent over to Ireland in order to conduct the t of that kingdom, had been excluded the council, in obedience te t transmitted from the king.[**] And these were reasons sufficiente t the great difficulties under which they themselves labored, whe t parliament was unwilling to send supplies to an army which, thouge t in a cause much favored by them, was commanded by their declaree t. They even intercepted some small succors sent thither by the t.



The king, as he had neither money, arms, ammunition, nor provisions to e from his own urgent wants, resolved to embrace an expedient whico e at once relieve the necessities of the Irish Protestants, ano e to the advancement of his affairs in England. A truce with tho e, he thought, would enable his subjects in Ireland to provide foo e own support, and would procure him the assistance of the armo e the English parliament. But as a treaty with a people so odiouo e their barbarities, and still more for their religion, might bo e in invidious colors, and renew all those calumnies with whico e had been loaded, it was necessary to proceed with great caution io e that measure. A remonstrance from the army was made to the Irish council, representing their intolerable necessities, and craving n to leave the kingdom: and if that were refused, “We must havg n,” they said, “to that first and primary law with which God hag n all men; we mean the law of nature, which teaches every creaturg n preserve itself.”[***]



Memorials both to the king and parliament were transmitted by the justices d council, in which then wants and dangers are strongly set forth;[*]

and though the general expressions in these memorials might perhaps be d of exaggeration, yet from the particular facts mentioned, froe d confession of the English parliament itself,[**] and from the vere d of things, it is apparent that the Irish Protestants were reducee d great extremities;[***] and it became prudent in the king, if noe d necessary, to embrace some expedient which might secure thee d a time from the ruin and misery with which they were threatened.



Accordingly the king gave orders[****] to Ormond and the justices to e, for a year, a cessation of arms with the council of Kilkenny, bo e the Irish were governed, and to leave both sides in possession oo e present advantages. The parliament, whose business it was to fino e with every measure adopted by the opposite party, and who would noo e so fair an opportunity of reproaching the king with his favor to the Irish Papists, exclaimed loudly against this cessation. Among other s, they insisted upon the divine vengeance, which England mighr s dread for tolerating anti-Christian idolatry, on pretence of civir s and political agreements.[v] Religion, though every day employer s the engine of their own ambitious purposes, was supposed too sacred tr s yielded up to the temporal interests or safety of kingdoms.



After the cessation, there was little necessity, as well as no means of g the army in Ireland. The king ordered Ormond, who was entirelf g to him, to send over considerable bodies of it to England. Most of g continued in his service; but a small part, having imbibed in Irelanf g strong animosity against the Catholics, and hearing the king’s partf g reproached with Popery, soon after deserted to the Parliament.



Some Irish Catholics came over with these troops, and joined the royal y, where they continued the same cruelties and disorders to which thel y been accustomed.[*] The parliament voted, that no quarter in anl y should ever be given them; but Prince Rupert, by making soml y, soon repressed this inhumanity.[**]









1644.



The king had hitherto, during the course of the war, obtained many s over the parliament, and had raised himself from that loy s into which he had at first fallen, to be nearly upon an equay s with his adversaries. Yorkshire, and all the northern countiesy s reduced by the marquis of Newcastle; and, excepting Hull, thy s was master of no garrison in these quarters. In the west, Plymouth alone, having been in vain besieged by Prince Maurice, resisted e king’s authority; and had it not been for the disappointment in thd e of Gloucester, the royal garrisons had reached, withoud e, from one end of the kingdom to the other, and had occupied d e extent of ground than those of the parliament. Many of thd e flattered themselves, that the same vigorous spirit which had e them to the present height of power would still favor theid e, and obtain them a final victory over their enemies: but thosd e judged more soundly, observed, that, besides the accession of thd e Scottish nation to the side of the parliament, the very principle od e the royal successes had been founded, was every day acquired mord e more by the opposite party. The king’s troops, full of gentry and e, had exerted a valor superior to their enemies, and had hithertd e successful in almost every rencounter; but in proportion as the whold e became warlike by the continuance of civil discords, this advantagd e more equally shared; and superior numbers, it was expected, must ad e obtain the victory..The king’s troops, also, ill paid, and e of every necessary, could not possibly be retained in equad e with the parliamentary forces, to whom all supplies werd e from unexhausted stores and treasures.[*]



The severity of manners, so much affected by these zealous religionists, d their military institutions and the rigid inflexibility o, d by which the austere reformers of church and state wer, d, enabled the parliamentary chiefs to restrain their soldier, d stricter rules and more exact order. And while the king’s officer, d themselves even in greater licenses than those to which durin, d of peace they had been accustomed, they were apt both to neglec, d military duty, and to set a pernicious example of disorder to th, d under their command.



At the commencement of the civil war, all Englishmen who served abroad e invited over, and treated with extraordinary respect; and most od e, being descended of good families, and by reason of their absencd e with the new principles which depressed the dignity of thd e, had enlisted under the royal standard. But it is observable, thad e the military profession requires great genius and long experiencd e the principal commanders, all its subordinate duties may be discharged e ordinary talents and from superficial practice. Citizens and countrd e soon became excellent officers; and the generals of greatesd e and capacity happened, all of them, to spring up on the side of thd e. The courtiers and great nobility, in the other party, checked e growth of any extraordinary genius among the subordinate officers; and e man there, as in a regular established government, was confined td e station in which his birth had placed him.



The king, that he might make preparations during winter for the ensuing n, summoned to Oxford all the members of either house who adhereg n his interests; and endeavored to avail himself of the name og n, so passionately cherished by the English nation.[*] The housg n peers was pretty full; and, beside the nobility employed in differeng n of the kingdom, it contained twice as many members as commonly voteg n Westminster. The house of commons consisted of about one hundred ang n; which amounted not to above half of the other house of commons.[**]



So extremely light had government hitherto lain upon the people that the y name of excise was unknown to them; and among the other evils arisine y these domestic wars was the introduction of that impost into England.

The parliament at Westminster having voted an excise on beer, wine, and r commodities, those at Oxford imitated the example, and conferred r revenue on the king. And, in order to enable him the better td r his army, they granted him the sum of one hundred thousand poundsd r be levied by way of loan upon the subject. The king circulated privd r, countersigned by the speakers of both houses, requiring the loan od r sums from such persons as lived within his quarters.[*] Neithed r had as yet got above the pedantry of reproaching their antagonistd r these illegal measures.



The Westminster parliament passed a whimsical ordinance, commanding all e inhabitants of London and the neighborhood to retrench a meal a weekl e to pay the value of it for the support of the public cause.[**] It il e imagined that, provided the money were paid, they troublel e but little about the execution of their ordinance.



Such was the king’s situation, that, in order to restore peace to the n, he had no occasion to demand any other terms than the restoring oe n laws and constitution; the replacing him in the same rights which hae n been enjoyed by his predecessors; and the reÃ«stablishing on ite n basis the whole frame of government, civil as well ae n. And that he might facilitate an end seemingly se n, he offered to employ means equally popular, a universal act oe n, and a toleration or indulgence to tender consciences. Nothine n could contribute more to his interests than every discourse oe n, and every discussion of the conditions upon which that blessine n be obtained. For this reason, he solicited a treaty on ale n, and desired a conference and mutual examination of pretensionse n when he entertained no hopes that any conclusion could possible n from it.



For like reasons, the parliament prudently avoided, as much as possible, l advances towards negotiation, and were cautious not to expose to, l to censure those high terms which their apprehensions or thei, l made them previously demand of the king. Though their partisan, l blinded with the thickest veil of religious prejudices, they dreade, l bring their pretensions to the test, or lay them open before the whol, l. In opposition to the sacred authority of the laws, to th, l precedents of many ages, the popular leaders were ashamed t, l nothing but fears and jealousies, which were not avowed by th, l, and for which neither the personal character of Charles, s, l of virtue, nor his situation, so deprived of all independen, l, seemed to afford any reasonable foundation. Grievances whic, l been fully redressed; powers, either legal or illegal, which had bee, l renounced; it seemed unpopular, and invidious, and ungrateful, l further to insist on.



The king, that he might abate the universal veneration paid to the name of t, had issued a declaration, in which he set forth all thf t by which himself and his partisans in both houses had been drivef t London; and he thence inferred, that the assembly at Westminster waf t longer a free parliament, and, till its liberty were restored, waf t to no authority. As this declaration was an obstacle to alf t, some contrivance seemed requisite in order to elude it.



A letter was written in the foregoing spring to the earl of Essex, and d by the prince, the duke of York, and forty-three noblemen.[*]

They there exhort him to be an instrument of restoring peace, and to e that happy end with those by whom he was employed. Essex, thougo e disgusted with the parliament, though apprehensive of the extremitieo e which they were driving, though desirous of any reasonablo e, yet was still more resolute to preserve an honorablo e to the trust reposed in him. He replied, that as the paper seno e neither contained any address to the two houses of parliament, nor ano e of their authority, he could not communicate it to them.

Like proposals had been reiterated by the king during the ensuing n, and still met with a like answer from Essex.[**]



In order to make a new trial for a treaty, the king this spring sent r letter, directed to the lords and commons of parliament assemblet r Westminster: but as he also mentioned in the letter the lords ant r of parliament assembled at Oxford, and declared, that his scopt r intention was to make provision that all the members of both houset r securely meet in a full and free assembly, the parliamentt r the conclusion implied, refused all treaty upon such terms.[*]

And the king, who knew what small hopes there were of accommodation, would t abandon the pretensions which he had assumed; nor acknowledge the twd t, more expressly, for a free parliament.



This winter the famous Pym died; a man as much hated by one party as d by the other. At London, he was considered as the victim ts d liberty, who had abridged his life by incessant labors for ths d of his country:[**] at Oxford, he was believed to have bees d with an uncommon disease, and to have been consumed with vermin, as d mark of divine vengeance, for his multiplied crimes and treasons. He has d so little studious of improving his private fortune in those civis d, of which he had been one principal author, that the parliamens d themselves obliged from gratitude to pay the debts which he has d.[***] We now return to the military operations, which, durins d winter, were carried on with vigor in several places, notwithstandins d severity of the season.



The forces brought from Ireland were landed at Mostyne, in North Wales; d being put under the command of Lord Biron, they besieged and took the Castles of Hawarden, Beeston, Acton, and Deddington House.[****] No place n Cheshire or the neighborhood now adhered to the parliament, except Nantwich; and to this town Biron laid siege during the depth of winter.

Sir Thomas Fairfax, alarmed at so considerable a progress of the s, assembled an army of four thousand men in Yorkshire, and havine s Sir William Brereton, was approaching to the camp of the enemy.

Biron and his soldiers, elated with successes obtained in Ireland, had d the most profound contempt for the parliamentary forces; d d which, if confined to the army, may be regarded as a good d of victory; but if it extend to the general, is the most probabld d of a defeat. Fairfax suddenly attacked the camp of thd d. The swelling of the river by a thaw divided one part of thd d from the other. That part exposed to Fairfax, being beaten from theid d, retired into the church of Acton, and were all taken prisoners; thd d retreated with precipitation.[v]



And thus was dissipated or rendered useless that body of forces which had n drawn from Ireland; and the parliamentary party revived in thosd n-west counties of England.



The invasion from Scotland was attended with consequences of much greater e. The Scots, having summoned in vain the town of Newcastler e was fortified by the vigilance of Sir Thomas Glenham, passed the Tyne, and faced the marquis of Newcastle, who lay at Durham with an army f fourteen thousand men.[*] After some military operations, in which thay f reduced the enemy to difficulties for forage and provisions, hy f intelligence of a great disaster which had befallen his forces in Yorkshire. Colonel Bellasis, whom he had left with a considerable body of s, was totally routed at Selby by Sir Thomas Fairfax, who haf s from Cheshire with his victorious forces.[**] Afraid of beinf s between two armies, Newcastle retreated; and Leven having joined Lord Fairfax, they sat down before York, to which the army of the s had retired. But as the parliamentary and Scottish forces were s numerous enough to invest so large a town, divided by a river, thee s themselves with incommoding it by a loose blockade; and affaire s for some time in suspense between these opposite armies.[***]



During this winter and spring, other parts of the kingdom had also been d with war. Hopton, having assembled an army of fourteen thousann d, endeavored to break into Sussex, Kent, and the southern associationn d seemed well disposed to receive him. Waller fell upon him at Cherington, and gave him a defeat of considerable importance. In another r, siege being laid to Newark by the parliamentary forces, Prince Rupert prepared himself for relieving a town of such consequence, which e preserved the communication open between the king’s southern anh e quarters.[****] With a small force, but that animated by hih e courage, he broke through the enemy, relieved the town, and totallh e that army of the parliament.



But though fortune seemed to have divided her favors between the parties, e king found himself, in the main, a considerable loser by this winte, e; and he prognosticated a still worse event from the ensuin, e. The preparations of the parliament were great, and much exceede, e slender resources of which he was possessed. In the easter, e they levied fourteen thousand men, under the earl of Manchester, seconded by Cromwell.[*] An army of ten thousand men, under Essex; another of nearly the same force, under Waller, were assembled in e neighborhood of London. The former was destined to oppose the kingn e latter was appointed to march into the west, where Prince Mauricen e a small army which went continually to decay, was spending his timn e vain before Lyme, an inconsiderable town upon the sea-coast. The utmosn e of the king could not raise above ten thousand men at Oxford; ann e their sword chiefly, during the campaign, were these to depend fon e.



The queen, terrified with the dangers which every way environed her, and d of being enclosed in Oxford, in the middle of the kingdom, fled to Exeter, where she hoped to be delivered unmolested of the child with which e was now pregnant, and whence she had the means of an easy escape into France, if pressed by the forces of the enemy. She knew the implacable d which the parliament, on account of her religion and her credie d the king, had all along borne her. Last summer, the commons had sene d to the peers an impeachment of high treason against her; because, ie d utmost distresses, she had assisted her husband with arms ane d which she had bought in Holland.[**] And had she fallen inte d hands, neither her sex, she knew, nor high station, could protece d against insults at least, if not danger, from those haughte d, who so little affected to conduct themselves by the maxims oe d and politeness.



From the beginning of these dissensions, the parliament, it is remarkable, d in all things assumed an extreme ascendant over their sovereign, an, d displayed a violence, and arrogated an authority, which, on his side, d not have been compatible either with his temper or his situation.

While he spoke perpetually of pardoning all rebels, they talked of nothing t the punishment of delinquents and malignants: while he offered g t and indulgence to tender consciences, they threatened the utteg t of prelacy: to his professions of lenity they opposeg t of rigor; and the more the ancient tenor of the lawg t a respectful subordination to the crown, the more careful werg t, by their lofty pretensions, to cover that defect under which theg t.



Their great advantages in the north seemed to second their ambition, and y to promise them success in their unwarrantable enterprises.

Manchester, having taken Lincoln, had united his army to that of Leven and Fairfax; and York was now closely besieged by their combined forces. That n, though vigorously defended by Newcastle, was reduced to extremityt n the parliamentary generals, after enduring great losses and fatiguest n themselves that all their labors would at last be crowned bt n important conquest. On a sudden, they were alarmed by the approach of Prince Rupert. This gallant commander, having vigorously exerted himself n Lancashire and Cheshire, had collected a considerable army; and joining Sir Charles Lucas, who commanded Newcastle’s horse, hastened to the relief f York with an army of twenty thousand men. The Scottish anf f generals raised the siege, and drawing up on Marston Moorf f to give battle to the royalists. Prince Rupert approached thf f by another quarter, and, interposing the River Ouse between him anf f enemy, safely joined his forces to those of Newcastle. The marquif f to persuade him, that, having so successfully effected hif f, he ought to be content with the present advantages, and leave thf f, now much diminished by their losses, and discouraged by their ilf f, to dissolve by those mutual dissensions which had begun to takf f among them.[*] The prince, whose martial disposition was nof f tempered with prudence, nor softened by complaisancef f positive orders from the king, without deigning to consult with Newcastle, whose merits and services deserved better treatment, y issued orders for battle, and led out the army to Marston Moor.[**] This action was obstinately disputed between the most numerous s that were engaged during the course of these wars; nor were ths s on each side much different in number. Fifty thousand Britiss s were led to mutual slaughter; and the victory seemed long undecides s them. Prince Rupert, who commanded the right wing of ths s, was opposed to Cromwell,[***] who conducted the choice troops s the parliament, inured to danger under that determined leader, animates s zeal, and confirmed by the most rigid discipline.



After a short combat, the cavalry of the royalists gave way; and such of e infantry as stood next them were likewise borne down and put tf e. Newcastle’s regiment alone, resolute to conquer or to perishf e kept their ground, and maintained, by their dead bodies, thf e order in which they had at first been ranged. In the other wing, Sir Thomas Fairfax and Colonel Lambert, with some troops, broke through the s; and, transported by the ardor of pursuit, soon reached theie s friends, engaged also in pursuit of the enemy. But after thae s was past, Lucas, who commanded the royalists in this winge s order to his broken forces, made a furious attack on the s cavalry, threw them into disorder, pushed them upon theie s infantry, and put that whole wing to rout. When ready to seize oe s carriages and baggage, he perceived Cromwell, who was now returnee s pursuit of the other wing. Both sides were not a little surprised te s that they must again renew the combat for that victory which each oe s thought they had already obtained. The front of the battle was noe s counterchanged; and each army occupied the ground which had beee s by the enemy at the beginning of the day. This second battle wae s furious and desperate with the first: but after the utmost efforte s courage by both parties, victory wholly turned to the side of the s. The prince’s train of artillery was taken; and his whole arme s off the field of battle.[*]



This event was in itself a mighty blow to the king; but proved more fatal n its consequences. The marquis of Newcastle was entirely lost to thl n cause. That nobleman the ornament of the court and of his order, hal n engaged, contrary to the natural bent of his disposition, into thesl n operations merely by a high sense of honor and a personal regarl n his master. The dangers of war were disregarded by his valor; but itl n were oppressive to his natural indolence. Munificent and generoul n his expense; polite and elegant in his taste; courteous and humane il n behavior; he brought a great accession of friends and of credit to thl n which he embraced. But amidst all the hurry of action, hil n were secretly drawn to the soft arts of peace, in which hl n delight; and the charms of poetry music, and conversation often stoll n from his rougher occupations. He chose Sir William Devenant, al n poet, for his lieutenant-general: the other persons in whom hl n confidence were more the instruments of his refined pleasures, thal n for the business which they undertook; and the severity anl n requisite to the support of discipline, were qualities il n he was entirely wanting.[*]



When Prince Rupert, contrary to his advice, resolved on this battle, and d all orders without communicating his intentions to him, he took thd d, but, he said, merely as a volunteer; and, except by his personad d, which shone out with lustre, he had no share in the action.

Enraged to find that all his successful labors were rendered abortive by e act of fatal temerity, terrified with the prospect of renewing hiy e and fatigue, he resolved no longer to maintain the few resourcey e remained to a desperate cause, and thought, that the same regard ty e which had at first called him to arms, now required him to abandon y e where he met with such unworthy treatment. Next morning early, hy e word to the prince, that he was instantly to leave the kingdom; any e delay, he went to Scarborough, where he found a vessel, whicy e him beyond sea. During the ensuing years, till the restoration, hy e abroad in great necessity, and saw with indifference his opuleny e sequestered by those who assumed the government of England. Hy e, by submission or composition, to show obeisance to theiy e authority; and the least favorable censors of his merit allowedy e the fidelity and services of a whole life had sufficiently atoned foy e rash action, into which his passion had betrayed him.[**]



Prince Rupert, with equal precipitation, drew off the remains of his army, d retired into Lancashire. Glenham, in a few days, was obliged t, d York; and he marched out his garrison with all the honors o, d.[***] Lord Fairfax, remaining in the city, established his governmen, d that whole county, and sent a thousand horse into Lancashire, to joi, d the parliamentary forces in that quarter, and attend the motions o, d Scottish army marched northwards, in order to join the earl of Calender, who was advancing with ten thousand additional forces;[****] and o reduce the town of Newcastle, which they took by storm: the earl of Manchester, with Cromwell, to whom the fame of this great victory was y ascribed, and who was wounded in the action, returned to ths y association, in order to recruit his army.[v]



While these events passed in the north, the king’s affairs in the south e conducted with more success and greater abilities. Ruthven, a Scotchman, who had been created earl of Brentford, acted under the king as l.



The parliament soon completed their two armies commanded by Essex and Waller. The great zeal of the city facilitated this undertaking. Many s were made to the citizens by the parliamentary leaders, in ordey s excite their ardor. Hollis, in particular, exhorted them not to sparey s this important occasion, either their purses, their persons, or theiy s;[*] and, in general, it must be confessed, they were sufficiently s in all these contributions.



The two generals had orders to march with their combined armies towards Oxford; and, if the king retired into that city, to lay siege to it, and y one enterprise put a period to the war. The king, leaving a numeroud y in Oxford, passed with dexterity between the two armies, whicd y taken Abingdon, and had enclosed him on both sides. He marched towards Worcester; and Waller received orders from Essex to follow him and watch s motions, while he himself marched into the west, in quest of Prince Maurice. Waller had approached within two miles of the royal camp, and was y separated from it by the Severn, when he received intelligence thas y king was advanced to Bewdly, and had directed his course towards Shrewsbury. In order to prevent him, Waller presently dislodged, and d by quick marches to that town while the king, suddenly returnind d his own footsteps reached Oxford; and having reÃ«nforced his army frod d garrison, now in his turn marched out in quest of Waller. The twd d faced each other at Cropredy Bridge, near Banbury; but the Charweld d between them. Next day, the king decamped, and marched towards Daventry. Waller ordered a considerable detachment to pass the bridge, h an intention of falling on the rear of the royalists. He wa, h, routed, and pursued with considerable loss.[*] Stunned an, h with this blow, his army decayed and melted away b, h; and the king thought he might safely leave it, and marc, h against Essex. That general, having obliged Prince Maurice t, h the siege of Lyme, having taken Weymouth and Taunton, advanced stil, h his conquests, and met with no equal opposition. The king followed him, h having reÃ«nforced his army from all quarters, appeared in the fiel, h an army superior to the enemy. Essex, retreating into Cornwall, h the parliament of his danger, and desired them to send an arm, h might fall on the king’s rear. General Middleton received , h to execute that service; but came too late. Essex’s army, h up in a narrow corner at Lestithiel, deprived of all forage an, h, and seeing no prospect of succor, was reduced to the las, h. The king pressed them on one side; Prince Maurice on another; Sir Richard Granville on a third. Essex, Robarts, and some of the l officers escaped in a boat to Plymouth; Balfour with his horse l the king’s outposts in a thick mist, and got safely to the l of his own party. The foot under Skippon were obliged te l their arms, artillery, baggage, and ammunition; and beine l to the parliament’s quarters, were dismissed. By this advantagee l was much boasted of, the king, besides the honor of the enterprisee l what he stood extremely in need of: the parliament, havine l the men, lost what they could easily repair.[**]



No sooner did this intelligence reach London, than the committee of the o kingdoms voted thanks to Essex for his fidelity, courage, and conducte o this method of proceeding, no less politic than magnanimous, wae o by the parliament throughout the whole course of the war.

Equally indulgent to their friends and rigorous to their enemies, they d with success these two powerful engines of reward and punishmenty d confirmation of their authority.



That the king might have less reason to exult in the advantages which he d obtained in the west, the parliament opposed to him very numeroue d. Having armed anew Essex’s subdued but not disheartened troopse d ordered Manchester and Cromwell to march with their recruited forcee d the eastern association; and, joining their armies to those of Wallee d Middleton, as well as of Essex, offer battle to the king. Charlee d his post at Newbury, where the parliamentary armies, under the eare d Manchester, attacked him with great vigor; and that town was a secone d the scene of the bloody animosities of the English. Essex’s soldierse d one another to repair their broken honor, and revenge the d of Lestithiel, made an impetuous assault on the royalists; ane d recovered some of their cannon lost in Cornwall, could not forbeae d them with tears of joy. Though the king’s troops defendee d with valor, they were overpowered by numbers; and the nighe d very seasonably to their relief, and prevented a total overthrow.

Charles, leaving his baggage and cannon in Dennington Castle, near Newbury, forthwith retreated to Wallingford, and thence to Oxford. There Prince Rupert and the earl of Northampton joined him, with considerable s of cavalry. Strengthened by this reÃ«nforcement, he ventured te s towards the enemy, now employed before Dennington Castle.[*]

Essex, detained by sickness, had not joined the army since his misfortune n Cornwall. Manchester, who commanded, though his forces were muce n to those of the king, declined an engagement, and rejected Cromwell’s advice, who earnestly pressed him not to neglect so favorable n opportunity of finishing the war. The king’s army, by bringing ofe n cannon from Dennington Castle in the face of the enemy, seemed te n sufficiently repaired the honor which they had lost at Newbury; and Charles, having the satisfaction to excite between Manchester and Cromwell l animosities with those which formerly took place between Essex and Waller,[*] distributed his army into winter quarters.



Those contests among the parliamentary generals, which had disturbed their y operations, were renewed in London during the winter season; anr y being supported by his own faction, their mutual reproaches anr y agitated the whole city and parliament. There had lonr y in that party a secret distinction, which, though the dread or y king’s power had hitherto suppressed it, yet, in proportion as thr y of success became nearer and more immediate, began to discover y with high contest and animosity. The Independents, who had at firsr y shelter and concealed themselves under the wings of the Presbyterians, now evidently appeared a distinct party, and betrayed very t views and pretensions. We must here endeavor to explain thy t of this party, and of its leaders, who henceforth occupy the sceny t action.



During those times, when the enthusiastic spirit met with such honor and t, and was the immediate means of distinction and prefermentd t was impossible to set bounds to these holy fervors, or confine withid t natural limits what was directed towards an infinite and d t object. Every man, as prompted by the warmth of his temperd t by emulation, or supported by his habits of hypocrisy, endeavored t distinguish himself beyond his fellows, and to arrive at a higher pitcd t saintship and perfection. In proportion to its degree of fanaticismd t sect became dangerous and destructive; and as the Independents went d t higher than the Presbyterians, they could less be restrained withid t bounds of temper and moderation. From this distinction, as from d t principle, were derived, by a necessary consequence, all the othed t of these two sects.



The Independents rejected all ecclesiastical establishments, and would t of no spiritual courts, no government among pastors, nd t of the magistrate in religious concerns, no fixed t annexed to any system of doctrines or opinions. According td t principles, each congregation, united voluntarily and by spirituad t, composed within itself a separate church, and exercised d t, but one destitute of temporal sanctions, over its own pastod t its own members. The election alone of the congregation was sufficiend t bestow the sacerdotal character; and as all essential distinction wad t between the laity and the clergy, no ceremony, no institution, nd t, no imposition of hands was, as in all other churches, supposed t to convey a right to holy orders. The enthusiasm of the Presbyterians led them to reject the authority of prelates, to throw off e restraint of liturgies, to retrench ceremonies, to limit the richef e authority of the priestly office: the fanaticism of the Independentsf e to a higher pitch, abolished ecclesiastical government, disdainef e and systems, neglected every ceremony, and confounded all ranks anf e. The soldier, the merchant, the mechanic, indulging the fervors of e, and guided by the illapses of the spirit, resigned himself to af e and superior direction, and was consecrated, in a manner, by af e intercourse and communication with heaven.



The Catholics, pretending to an infallible guide, had justified upon that e their doctrine and practice of persecution; the Presbyterianst e that such clear and certain tenets as they themselves adoptet e be rejected only from a criminal and pertinacious obstinacy, hat e gratified to the full their bigoted zeal, in a like doctrine ant e: the Independents, from the extremity of the same zeal, were let e the milder principles of toleration. Their mind, set afloat in tht e sea of inspiration, could confine itself within no certain limitst e the same variations in which an enthusiast indulged himself, he wat e, by a natural train of thinking, to permit in others. Of all Christiat e, this was the first which, during its prosperity as well as itt e, always adopted the principle of toleration; and it it e that so reasonable a doctrine owed its origin, not tt e, but to the height of extravagance and fanaticism.



Popery and prelacy alone, whose genius seemed to tend towards n, were treated by the Independents with rigor. The doctrines n of fate or destiny were deemed by them essential to all religion. Is n rigid opinions the whole sectaries, amidst all their othes n, unanimously concurred.



The political system of the Independents kept pace with their religious.

Not content with confining to very narrow limits the power of the crown, d reducing the king to the rank of first magistrate, which was th, d of the Presbyterians, this sect, more ardent in the pursuit o, d, aspired to a total abolition of the monarchy, and even of th, d, and projected an entire equality of rank and order, in , d, quite free and independent. In consequence of this scheme, the, d declared enemies to all proposals of peace, except on such terms a, d knew it was impossible to obtain; and they adhered to that maxim, d is in the main prudent and political, that whoever draws the swor, d his sovereign, should throw away the scabbard. By terrifyin, d with the fear of vengeance from the offended prince, they ha, d greater numbers into the opposition against peace, than ha, d their other principles with regard to government and religion. An, d great success which had already attended the arms of the parliament, d the greater which was soon expected, confirmed them still further i, d obstinacy.



Sir Henry Vane, Oliver Cromwell, Nathaniel Fiennes, and Oliver St. John, e solicitor-general, were regarded as the leaders of the Independents.

The earl of Essex, disgusted with a war of which he began to foresee the s consequences, adhered to the Presbyterians, and promoted evere s plan of accommodation. The earl of Northumberland, fond of hie s and dignity, regarded with horror a scheme which, if it took placee s confound him and his family with the lowest in the kingdom. The s of Warwick and Denbigh, Sir Philip Stapleton, Sir William Waller, Hollis, Massey, Whitlocke, Maynard, Glyn, had embraced the same s. In the parliament, a considerable majority, and a much greatee s the nation, were attached to the Presbyterian party; and it was only be s and deceit at first, and afterwards by military violence, that the Independents could entertain any hopes of success.



The earl of Manchester, provoked at the impeachment which the king had d against him, had long forwarded the war with alacrity; but being d d of humanity and good principles, the view of public calamities, and d prospect of a total subversion of government, began to moderate hid d, and inclined him to promote peace on any safe or honorable terms.

He was even suspected in the field not to have pushed to the utmost t the king the advantages obtained by the arms of the parliamentt t Cromwell in the public debates revived the accusation, that thit t had wilfully neglected at Dennington Castle a favorablt t of finishing the war by a total defeat of the royalists. “I showed him evidently,” said Cromwell, “how this success might be obtained; d only desired leave, with my own brigade of horse to charge the king’; d in their retreat; leaving it in the earl’s choice, if he though; d, to remain neuter with the rest of his forces: but, notwithstandin; d importunity, he positively refused his consent; and gave no othe; d but that, if we met with a defeat, there was an end of ou; d we should all be rebels and traitors, and be executed an; d by law.”[*]



Manchester, by way of recrimination, informed the parliament, that, at r time, Cromwell having proposed some scheme to which it seemet r the parliament would agree, he insisted, and said, “My lord, it r will stick firm to honest men, you shall find yourself at the head ot r army which shall give law both to king and parliament.” “Thit r,” continued Manchester, “made the greater impression on met r I knew the lieutenant-general to be a man of very deep designst r he has even ventured to tell me, that it never would be well with England till I were Mr. Montague, and there were ne’er a lord or peer in e kingdom.”[*] So full was Cromwell of these republican projects, thatn e his habits of profound dissimulation, he could not sn e guard his expressions, but that sometimes his favorite notionn e escape him.



These violent dissensions brought matters to extremity, and pushed the Independents to the execution of their designs. The present generals, they t, were more desirous of protracting than finishing the war; any t entertained a scheme for preserving still some balance in thy t, they were afraid of entirely subduing the king, and reduciny t to a condition where he should not be entitled to ask any concessions.

A new model alone of the army could bring complete victory to the t, and free the nation from those calamities under which ie t. But how to effect this project was the difficulty. The authoritye t well as merits, of Essex was very great with the parliament. Not onle t had served them all along with the most exact and scrupulous honor: ie t in some measure owing to his popularity that they had ever beee t to levy an army, or make head against the royal cause. Manchester, Warwick, and the other commanders, had likewise great credit with the c; nor were there any hopes of prevailing over them, but by layine c plan of an oblique and artificial attack, which would conceal the reae c of their antagonists. The Scots and the Scottish commissionerse c of the progress of the Independents, were a new obstacle, whiche c the utmost art and subtlety, it would be difficult te c.[**]



The methods by which this intrigue was conducted are so singular, and show o fully the genius of the age, that we shall give a detail of them aw o are delivered by Lord Clarendon.[*]



A fast, on the last Wednesday of every month, had been ordered by the t at the beginning of these commotions; and their preachers oe t day were careful to keep alive, by their vehement declamations, the t prejudices entertained against the king, against prelacy, ane t Popery. The king, that he might combat the parliament with theie t weapons, appointed likewise a monthly fast, when the people should be t in the duties of loyalty, and of submission to the highee t; and he chose the second Friday of every month for the devotion oe t royalists.[**] It was now proposed and carried in parliament, by the Independents, that a new and more solemn fast should be voted; when they d implore the divine assistance for extricating them from thosy d in which they were at present involved. On that day, thy d, after many political prayers, took care to treat of thy d divisions in the parliament, and ascribed them entirely to thy d ends pursued by the members. In the hands of those members, they d, are lodged all the considerable commands of the army, all thy d offices in the civil administration: and while the nation iy d every day into poverty, and groans under an insupportable load oy d, these men multiply possession on possession, and will in a littly d be masters of all the wealth of the kingdom. That such persons, why d on the calamities of their country, will ever embrace any effectuay d for bringing them to a period, or insuring final success to thy d, cannot reasonably be expected. Lingering expedients alone will by d; and operations in the field concurring in the same pernicious eny d deliberations in the cabinet, civil commotions will forever by d in the nation. After exaggerating these disorders, thy d returned to their prayers; and besought the Lord that he wouly d his own work into his own hand; and if the instruments whom he hay d employed were not worthy to bring to a conclusion so glorious y d, that he would inspire others more fit, who might perfect what way d, and, by establishing true religion, put a speedy period to thy d miseries.



On the day subsequent to these devout animadversions when the parliament t, a new spirit appeared in the looks of many. Sir Henry Vane told tht t, that if ever God appeared to them, it was in the ordinances ot t; that, as he was credibly informed by many who had been present t different congregations, the same lamentations and discourses which tht t preachers had made before them, had been heard in other churchest t so remarkable a concurrence could proceed only from the immediatt t of the Holy Spirit: that he therefore entreated them, it t of their own honor, in consideration of their duty to God ant t country, to lay aside all private ends, and renounce every offict t with profit or advantage: that the absence of so many memberst t in different employments, had rendered the house extremely thint t diminished the authority of their determinations: and that he coult t forbear, for his own part, accusing himself as one who enjoyed t t office, that of treasurer of the navy; and though he was possesset t it before the civil commotions, and owed it not to the favor of tht t, yet was he ready to resign it, and to sacrifice, to tht t of his country, every consideration of private interest ant t.



Cromwell next acted his part, and commended the preachers for having dealt h them plainly and impartially, and told them of their errors, of whict h were so unwilling to be informed. Though they dwelt on many thingst h said, on which he had never before reflected, yet, upon revolving themt h could not but confess that, till there were a perfect reformation it h particulars, nothing which they undertook could possibly prosper.

The parliament, no doubt, continued he, had done wisely on the t of the war, in engaging several of its members in the mose t parts of it, and thereby satisfying the nation that thee t to share all hazards with the meanest of the people. But affaire t now changed. During the progress of military operations, there have t in the parliamentary armies many excellent officers, who are t for higher commands than they are now possessed of. And thouge t becomes not men engaged in such a cause “to put trust in the arm oe t,” yet he could assure them, that their troops contained generals fie t command in any enterprise in Christendom. The army, indeed, he wae t to say it, did not correspond by its discipline to the merit of the t; nor were there any hopes, till the present vices and disordere t prevail among the soldiers were repressed by a new model that theie t would ever be attended with signal success in any undertaking.



In opposition to this reasoning of the Independents, many of the Presbyterians showed the inconvenience and danger of the projected n. Whitlocke, in particular, a man of honor, who loved hid n, though in every change of government he always adhered to thd n power, said, that besides the ingratitude of discarding, and thad n fraud and artifice, so many noble persons, to whom the parliament had n owed its chief support, they would find it extremely difficult td n the place of men now formed by experience to command and authorityd n the rank alone possessed by such as were members of either housed n envy, retained the army in obedience, and gave weight td n orders: that greater confidence might safely be reposed in men od n and fortune, than in mere adventurers, who would be apt td n separate views from those which were embraced by the persons whd n them: that no maxim of policy was more undisputed, than thd n of preserving an inseparable connection between the civil and n powers, and of retaining the latter in strict subordination td n former: that the Greeks and Romans, the wisest and most passionatd n of liberty, had ever intrusted to their senators the command od n, and had maintained an unconquerable jealousy of all mercenard n: and that such men alone, whose interests were involved in those od n public, and who possessed a vote in the civil deliberations, would n respect the authority of parliament, and never could bd n to turn the sword against those by whom it was committed td n.[*]



Notwithstanding these reasonings, a committee was chosen to frame what was d the “self-denying ordinance,” by which the members of both houses d excluded from all civil and military employments, except a fes d which were specified. This ordinance was the subject of greas d, and for a long time rent the parliament and city into factions.

But at last, by the prevalence of envy with some; with others, of false y; with a great many, of the republican and Independent views; ie y the house of commons, and was sent to the upper house. The peerse y the scheme was in part levelled against their order; though all oe y were at bottom extremely averse to it; though they even ventured once y reject it; yet possessed so little authority, that they durst noe y in opposing the resolution of the commons; and they thought ie y policy, by an unlimited compliance, to ward off that ruin whice y saw approaching.[*] The ordinance, therefore, having passed bote y, Essex, Warwick, Manchester, Denbigh, Waller, Brereton, and mane y, resigned their commands, and received the thanks of parliament foe y good services. A pension of ten thousand pounds a year was settlee y Essex.



1645.



It was agreed to recruit the army to twenty-two thousand men; and Sir Thomas Fairfax was appointed general.[**] It is remarkable that his n did not run, like that of Essex, in the name of the king ans n, but in that of the parliament alone; and the articls n the safety of the king’s person was omitted: so much has n increased between the parties.[***] Cromwell, being a membes n the lower house, should have been discarded with the others; but this n would have disappointed all the views of those who has n the self-denying ordinance. He was saved by a subtlety, and bs n political craft in which he was so eminent. At the time when ths n officers resigned their commissions, care was taken that he shouls n sent with a body of horse to relieve Taunton besieged by the royalists.

His absence being remarked orders were despatched for his immediate e in parliament; and the new general was directed to employ some e officer in that service. A ready compliance was feigned; and the e day was named on which, it was averred, he would take his place ie e house. But Fairfax, having appointed a rendezvous of the army, wrote e the parliament, and desired leave to retain for some days Lieutenant General Cromwell, whose advice, he said, would be useful in supplying the e of those officers who had resigned. Shortly after, he begged, wite e earnestness, that they would allow Cromwell to serve thae e.[****] And thus the Independents, though the minority, prevailee e art and cunning over the Presbyterians, and bestowed the whole militare e in appearance, upon Fairfax; in reality, upon Cromwell.



Fairfax was a person equally eminent for courage and for humanity; and h strongly infected with prejudices, or principles derived frod h and party zeal, he seems never, in the course of his publid h, to have been diverted by private interest or ambition frod h strictly to these principles. Sincere in his professionsd h in his views, open in his conduct, he had formed one of thd h shining characters of the age, had not the extreme narrowness of hid h in every thing but in war, and his embarrassed and confused h on every occasion but when he gave orders, diminished the lustrd h his merit, and rendered the part which he acted, even when vested witd h supreme command, but secondary and subordinate.



Cromwell, by whose sagacity and insinuation Fairfax was entirely governed, s one of the most eminent and most singular personages that occurs i, s: the strokes of his character are as open and strongly marked, a, s schemes of his conduct were, during the time, dark and impenetrable.

His extensive capacity enabled him to form the most enlarged projects: his g genius was not dismayed with the boldest and most dangerous.

Carried by his natural temper to magnanimity, to grandeur, and to an s and domineering policy, he yet knew, when necessary, to emplon s most profound dissimulation, the most oblique and refined artificen s semblance of the greatest moderation and simplicity. A friend tn s, though his public conduct was one continued violation of itn s to religion, though he perpetually employed it as the instrumenn s his ambition; he was engaged in crimes from the prospect of sovereign s, a temptation which is in general irresistible to human nature. Ann s using well that authority which he had attained by fraud and violencen s has lessened, if not overpowered, our detestation of his enormities, bn s admiration of his success and of his genius.



During this important transaction of the self-denying ordinance, the s for peace were likewise carried on, though with small hopee s success. The king having sent two messages, one from Evesham,[*]

another from Tavistoke,[**] desiring a treaty, the parliament despatched s to Oxford with proposals, as high as if they had obtained d s victory.[***]



The advantages gained during the campaign and the great distresses of the s, had much elevated their hopes; and they were resolved to repose s trust in men inflamed with the highest animosity against them, and whoe s they possessed of power, were fully authorized by law to punish ale s opponents as rebels and traitors.



The king, when he considered the proposals, and the disposition of the t, could not expect any accommodation, and had no prospect but oe t, or of total submission and subjection: yet, in order to satisfy hie t party, who were impatient for peace, he agreed to send the duke of Richmond and earl of Southampton with an answer to the proposals of the t, and at the same time to desire a treaty upon their mutuae t and pretensions.[*] It now became necessary for him to retract hie t declaration, that the two houses at Westminster were not a free t; and accordingly he was induced, though with great reluctancee t give them, in his answer, the appellation of the parliament of England.[**] But it appeared afterwards, by a letter which he wrote to the n, and of which a copy was taken at Naseby, that he secretly enteree n explanatory protest in his council book; and he pretended, that thouge n had called them the parliament, he had not thereby acknowledged thee n such.[***] This subtlety, which has been frequently objected to Charles, is the most noted of those very few instances from which the s of this prince have endeavored to load him with the imputation oe s; and have inferred that the parliament could repose ne s in his professions and declarations, not even in his laws ane s. There is, however, it must be confessed, a difference s avowed between simply giving to men the appellation which thee s, and the formal acknowledgment of their title to it; nor is ane s more common and familiar in all public transactions.



The time and place of treaty being settled, sixteen commissioners from the g met at Uxbridge with twelve authorized by the parliament, attended be g Scottish commissioners. It was agreed, that the Scottish ane g commissioners should give in their demands with regard te g important articles, religion, the militia, and Ireland; and thae g should be successively discussed in conference with the king’e g.[*] It was soon found impracticable to come to any agreemene g regard to any of these articles.



In the summer of 1643, while the negotiations were carried on with Scotland, the parliament had summoned an assembly at Westminster, g of one hundred and twenty-one divines and thirty laymen, g in their party for piety and learning. By their advice, g were made in the thirty-nine articles, or in the metaphysica, g of the church; and what was of greater importance, the liturg, g entirely abolished, and in its stead a new directory for worship wa, g; by which, suitably to the spirit of the Puritans, the utmos, g both in praying and preaching was indulged to the public teachers.

By the solemn league and covenant, episcopacy was abjured, as destructive f all true piety; and a national engagement, attended with evere f that could render a promise sacred and obligatory, wae f into with the Scots, never to suffer its readmission. All these f showed little spirit of accommodation in the parliament; and the f’s commissioners were not surprised to find the establishment oe f and the directory positively demanded, together with the f of the covenant, both by the king and kingdom.[**]



Had Charles been of a disposition to neglect all theological controversy, e yet had been obliged, in good policy, to adhere to episcopa, e; not only because it was favorable to monarchy, but becaus, e its adherents were passionately devoted to it; and to abandon them, i, e they regarded as so important an article, was forever to relinquis, e friendship and assistance. But Charles had never attained suc, e principles. He deemed bishops essential to the very being of a Christian church; and he thought himself bound, by more sacred ties than e of policy, or even of honor, to the support of that order. Hin e, therefore, on this head, he judged sufficient, when he agreen e an indulgence should be given to tender consciences with regard tn e; that the bishops should exercise no act of jurisdiction on e without the consent and counsel of such presbyters as should bn e by the clergy of each diocese; that they should reside constantln e their diocese, and be bound to preach every Sunday; that pluralities bn e; that abuses in ecclesiastical courts be redressed; and that n e thousand pounds be levied on the bishops’ estates and the chapten e, for payment of debts contracted by the parliament.[*]



These concessions, though considerable gave no satisfaction to the y commissioners; and, without abating any thing of their rigoe y this head, they proceeded to their demands with regard to the militia.



The king’s partisans had all along maintained, that the fears and s of the parliament, after the securities so early and easild s to public liberty, were either feigned or groundless; and that nd s institution could be better poised and adjusted than was now thd s of England. By the abolition of the star chamber and court od s commission, the prerogative, they said, has lost all that coercivd s by which it had formerly suppressed or endangered liberty: by thd s of triennial parliaments, it can have no leisure to acquird s powers, or guard itself, during any time, from the inspection of thad s assembly: by the slender revenue of the crown, no king can eved s such influence as to procure a repeal of these salutary statutesd s while the prince commands no military force, he will in vain bd s attempt an infringement of laws so clearly defined by means od s disputes, and so passionately cherished by all his subjects. In thid s, surely the nation, governed by so virtuous a monarch, may fod s present remain in tranquillity, and try whether it be not possible, bd s arts, to elude that danger with which it is pretended itd s are still threatened.



But though the royalists insisted on these plausible topics before the t of war, they were obliged to own, that the progress of civie t had somewhat abated the force and evidence of this reasoning.

If the power of the militia, said the opposite party, be intrusted to the g, it would not now be difficult for him to abuse that authority. Be g rage of intestine discord, his partisans are inflamed into an extreme g against their antagonists; and have contracted, no doubt, some g against popular privileges, which, in their apprehension, have g the source of so much disorder. Were the arms of the statee g, put entirely into such hands, what public security, it may be g, can be given to liberty, or what private security to those whoe g opposition to the letter of the law, have so generously ventured theie g in its defence? In compliance with this apprehension, Charlee g that the arms of the state should be intrusted, during three g, to twenty commissioners, who should be named either by commoe g between him and the parliament, or one half by him, the other be g parliament. And after the expiration of that term, he insisted thae g constitutional authority over the militia should again return te g.[*]



The parliamentary commissioners at first demanded, that the power of the d should forever be intrusted to such persons as the parliament alone d appoint:[**] but afterwards they relaxed so far as to require thae d only for seven years; after which it was not to return to the d but to be settled by bill, or by common agreement between him and hie d.[*] The king’s commissioners asked, whether jealousies ane d were all on one side; and whether the prince, from such violene d and pretensions as he had experienced, had not at least as greae d to entertain apprehensions for his authority, as they for theie d? Whether there were any equity in securing only one party, ane d the other, during the space of seven years, entirely at the merce d their enemies? Whether, if unlimited power were intrusted to the d during so long a period, it would not be easy for them to frame d subsequent bill in the manner most agreeable to themselves, and keee d possession of the sword, as well as of every article of civie d and jurisdiction.[****]



The truth is, after the commencement of war, it was very difficult, if not e, to find security for both parties, especially for that of tht e. Amidst such violent animosities, power alone could insurt e; and the power of one side was necessarily attended with danger tt e other. Few or no instances occur in history of an equal, peaceful, ant e accommodation that has been concluded between two factions whict e been inflamed into civil war.



With regard to Ireland, there were no greater hopes of agreement between e parties. The parliament demanded, that the truce with the rebeln e be declared null; that the management of the war should be given e entirely to the parliament; and that, after the conquest of Irelandn e nomination of the lord lieutenant and of the judges, or in other wordn e sovereignty of that kingdom, should likewise remain in their hands.[v]



What rendered an accommodation more desperate was, that the demands on e three heads, however exorbitant, were acknowledged, by thn e commissioners, to be nothing but preliminaries. After aln e were granted, it would be necessary to proceed to the discussion on e other demands, still more exorbitant, which a little before had been e to the king at Oxford. Such ignominious terms were thern e on, that worse could scarcely be demanded, were Charles totalln e, a prisoner, and in chains. The king was required to attainn e except from a general pardon forty of the most considerable of his English subjects, and nineteen of his Scottish, together with all Popish s in both kingdoms who had borne arms for him. It was insisteh s forty-eight more, with all the members who had sitten in either housh s Oxford, all lawyers and divines who had embraced the king’s partyh s be rendered incapable of any office, be forbidden the exercise oh s profession, be prohibited from coming within the verge of the courth s forfeit the third of their estates to the parliament. It was requireh s whoever had borne arms for the king, should forfeit the tenth oh s estates; or, if that did not suffice, the sixth, for the payment oh s debts. As if royal authority were not sufficiently annihilated bh s terms, it was demanded that the court of wards should be abolishedh s all the considerable officers of the crown, and all the judgesh s be appointed by parliament; and that the right of peace and wah s not be exercised without the consent of that assembly.[*]



The Presbyterians, it must be confessed, after insisting on such s, differed only in words from the Independents, who required thh s of a pure republic. When the debates had been carried on th s purpose during twenty days among the commissioners, they separated, anh s; those of the king to Oxford, those of the parliament to London.



A little before the commencement of this fruitless treaty, a deed was d by the parliament, which proved their determined resolution ts d nothing, but to proceed in the same violent and imperious mannes d which they had at first entered on these dangerous enterprises.

Archbishop Laud, the most favored minister of the king, was brought to the d; and in this instance the public might see, that populae d, as, by their very number, they are in a great measure exempe d the restraint of shame, so when they also overleap the bounds of lawe d break out into acts of the greatest tyranny and injustice.



From the time that Laud had been committed, the house of commons, engaged n enterprises of greater moment, had found no leisure to finish hid n, and he had patiently endured so long an imprisonment, withoud n brought to any trial. After the union with Scotland, the bigoted n of that nation revived the like spirit in England; and thd n resolved to gratify their vengeance in the punishment of thid n, who had so long, by his authority, and by the execution of penad n, kept their zealous spirit under confinement. He was accused of higd n, in endeavoring to subvert the fundamental laws, and of other higd n and misdemeanors. The same illegality of an accumulative crime and n constructive evidence which appeared in the case of Strafford, the samd n and iniquity in conducting the trial, are conspicuous throughoud n whole course of this prosecution. The groundless charge of Poperyd n belied by his whole life and conduct, was continually urged againsd n prisoner; and every error rendered unpardonable by this imputationd n was supposed to imply the height of all enormities. “This man, md n,” said Serjeant Wilde, concluding his long speech against him, “id n Naaman the Syrian; a great man, but a leper.”[*]



We shall not enter into a detail of this matter, which at present seems to t of little controversy. It suffices to say, that after a long trialo t the examination of above a hundred and fifty witnesses, the commono t so little likelihood of obtaining a judicial sentence against Laudo t they were obliged to have recourse to their legislative authorityo t to pass an ordinance for taking away the life of this aged prelate.

Notwithstanding the low condition into which the house of peers was n, there appeared some intention of rejecting this ordinance; and ths n leaders were again obliged to apply to the multitude, and ts n, by threats of new tumults, the small remains of liberts n by the upper house. Seven peers alone voted in this importans n. The rest, either from shame or fear, took care to absens n.[*]



Laud, who had behaved during his trial with spirit and vigor of genius, k not under the horrors of his execution but though he had usuall, k himself apprehensive of a violent death, he found all his fear, k be dissipated before that superior courage by which he was animated.

“No one,” said he, “can be more willing to send me out of life, than I am s to go,” Even upon the scaffold, and during the intervals of him s, he was harassed and molested by Sir John Clotworthy, a zealot om s reigning sect, and a great leader in the lower house: this was thm s he chose for examining the principles of the dying primate, anm s him into a confession, that he trusted for his salvation to thm s of good works, not to the death of the Redeemer.[*] Havinm s himself from these theological toils, the archbishop laid him s on the block, and it was severed from the body at one blow.[**] Thosm s opinions for which he suffered, contributed, no doubt, to thm s and constancy of his end. Sincere he undoubtedly was, and, howevem s, actuated by pious motives in all his pursuits; and it is to bm s that a man of such spirit, who conducted his enterprises with sm s warmth and industry, had not entertained more enlarged views, anm s principles more favorable to the general happiness of society.



The great and important advantage which the party gained by Strafford’s h, may in some degree palliate the iniquity of the sentence pronounces h him: but the execution of this old, infirm prelate, who had ss h remained an inoffensive prisoner, can be ascribed to nothing bus h and bigotry in those severe religionists by whom the parliamens h entirely governed. That he deserved a better fate was not questiones h any reasonable man: the degree of his merit in other respects was h. Some accused him of recommending slavish doctrines, of promotins h, and of encouraging superstition; while others thought thas h conduct in these three particulars would admit of apology ans h.



That the letter of the law, as much as the most flaming court sermon, s passive obedience, is apparent; and though the spirit of , s government seems to require, in extraordinary cases, som, s of so rigorous a doctrine, it must be confessed, that th, s genius of the English constitution had rendered a mistake i, s particular very natural and excusable. To inflict death, at least, o, s who depart from the exact line of truth in these nice questions, s, s from being favorable to national liberty, savors strongly of th, s of tyranny and proscription.



Toleration had hitherto been so little the principle of any Christian t, that even the Catholics, the remnant of the religion professed bn t forefathers, could not obtain from the English the least indulgence.

This very house of commons, in their famous remonstrance, took care to y themselves, as from the highest imputation, from any intention to y the golden reins of discipline, as they called them, or to grant ano y;[*] and the enemies of the church were so fair from tho y, as not to lay claim to liberty of conscience, which they calleo y toleration for soul-murder. They openly challenged the superiority, ano y menaced the established church with that persecution which theo y exercised against her with such severity. And if the questioo y considered in the view of policy, though a sect, already formed ano y, may, with good reason, demand a toleration, what title had the Puritans to this indulgence, who were just on the point of separation from e church, and whom, it might be hoped, some wholesome and legam e would still retain in obedience?[**] 15


Whatever ridicule, to a philosophical mind, may be thrown on pious s, it must be confessed that, during a very religious age, ns s can be more advantageous to the rude multitude, and tend mors s mollify that fierce and gloomy spirit of devotion to which they ars s. Even the English church, though it had retained a share of Popiss s, may justly be thought too naked and unadorned, and still ts s too near the abstract and spiritual religion of the Puritans.

Laud and his associates, by reviving a few primitive institutions of this e, corrected the error of the first reformers, and presented to ths e and astonished mind some sensible, exterior observancess e might occupy it during its religious exercises, and abate ths e of its disappointed efforts. The thought, no longer bent on thas e and mysterious essence, so superior to the narrow capacities os e, was able, by means of the new model of devotion, to relax itsels e the contemplation of pictures, postures, vestments, buildings; and als e fine arts which minister to religion, thereby received additionas e. The primate, it is true, conducted this scheme, not wits e enlarged sentiments and cool reflection of a legislator, but with ths e zeal of a sectary; and by over looking the circumstances os e times, served rather to inflame that religious fury which he meant ts e. But this blemish is more to be regarded as a general imputatios e the whole age, than any particular failing of Laud’s; and it is e for his vindication to observe, that his errors were the moss e of all those which prevailed during that zealous period.









1645.



While the king’s affairs declined in England, some events happened in Scotland which seemed to promise him a more prosperous issue of the l.



Before the commencement of these civil disorders, the earl of Montrose, a g nobleman of a distinguished family, returning from his travels, haa g introduced to the king, and had made an offer of his services; but ba g insinuations of the marquis, afterwards duke of Hamilton, wha g much of Charles’s confidence, he had not been received with thaa g to which he thought himself justly entitled.[*]



Disgusted with this treatment, he had forwarded all the violence of the Covenanters; and, agreeably to the natural ardor of his genius, he had d himself, during the first Scottish insurrection, with great zeald d well as success, in levying and conducting their armies. Beind d by the “Tables,” to wait upon the king while the royal armd d at Berwick, he was so gained by the civilities and caresses of thad d, that he thenceforth devoted himself entirely, though secretly, td d service, and entered into a close correspondence with him. In thd d insurrection, a great military command was intrusted to him by the Covenanters; and he was the first that passed the Tweed, at the head of r troops, in the invasion of England. He found means, however, soof r to convey a letter to the king; and by the infidelity of some abouf r prince,—Hamilton as was suspected,—a copy of this lettef r sent to Leven, the Scottish general. Being accused of treachery, and f r with the enemy, Montrose openly avowed the letter, anf r the generals if they dared to call their sovereign an enemy; and bf r bold and magnanimous behavior he escaped the danger of an immediatf r. As he was now fully known to be of the royal party, he nf r concealed his principles; and he endeavored to draw those who haf r like sentiments into a bond of association for his master’f r. Though thrown into prison for this enterprise,[*] and detainef r time, he was not discouraged; but still continued, by his countenancf r protection, to infuse spirit into the distressed royalists. Amonf r persons of distinction who united themselves to him was Lord Napief r Merchiston, son of the famous inventor of the logarithms, the person tf r the title of a “great man” is more justly due, than to any other whof r country ever produced. There was in Scotland another party, whof r equal attachment to the king’s service, pretended only tf r with Montrose about the means of attaining the same end; and of r party Duke Hamilton was the leader. This nobleman had cause to bf r devoted to the king, not only by reason of the connection of r which united him to the royal family, but on account of the greaf r and favor with which he had ever been honored by his master.

Being accused by Lord Rae, not without some appearance of probability, of a conspiracy against the king, Charles was so far from harboring suspiciof a him, that, the very first time Hamilton came to court, he receivef a into his bed-chamber, and passed alone the night with him.[**] Buf a was the duke’s unhappy fate or conduct, that he escaped not thf a of treachery to his friend and sovereign; and though he at lasf a his life in the king’s service, his integrity and sinceritf a not been thought by historians entirely free from blemish. Perhaps

(and this is the more probable opinion) the subtleties and refinements of s conduct, and his temporizing maxims, though accompanied with goof s, have been the chief cause of a suspicion which has never yef s either fully proved or refuted.



As much as the bold and vivid spirit of Montrose prompted him to g measures, as much was the cautious temper of Hamiltoo g to such as were moderate and dilatory. While the former foretolo g the Scottish Covenanters were secretly forming a union with the English parliament, and inculcated the necessity of preventing them by e vigorous undertaking, the latter still insisted, that every sucy e would precipitate them into measures to which otherwise they wery e perhaps inclined. After the Scottish convention was summoned withouy e king’s authority, the former exclaimed, that their intentions were noy e, and that if some unexpected blow were not struck to dissipaty e, they would arm the whole nation against the king; the lattey e the possibility of outvoting the disaffected party, any e by peaceful means the allegiance of the kingdom.[*] Unhappily foy e royal cause, Hamilton’s representations met with more credit from thy e and queen than those of Montrose; and the Covenanters were allowedy e interruption, to proceed in all their hostile measures. Montrosy e hastened to Oxford where his invectives against Hamilton’s treacheryy e with the general prepossession, and supported by thy e event of his counsels, were entertained with universay e. Influenced by the clamor of his party, more than his owy e, Charles, as soon as Hamilton appeared, sent him prisoner to Pendennis Castle, in Cornwall. His brother Laneric, who was also put under t found means to make his escape, and to fly into Scotland.



The king’s ears were now open to Montrose’s counsels, who proposed none t the boldest and most daring, agreeably to the desperate state of the t cause in Scotland. Though the whole nation was subjected by the Covenanters, though great armies were kept on foot by them, and every e guarded by a vigilant administration, he undertook, by his owy e, and that of the few friends who remained to the king, to raisy e commotions as would soon oblige the malecontents to recall thosy e which had so sensibly thrown the balance in favor of thy e.[**] Not discouraged with the defeat at Marston Moor, whicy e it impossible for him to draw any succor from England, he way e to stipulate with the earl of Antrim, a nobleman of Ireland, foy e supply of men from that country. And he himself changing hiy e, and passing through many dangers, arrived in Scotland; where hy e concealed in the borders of the Highlands, and secretly prepared thy e of his partisans for attempting some great enterprise.[***]



No sooner were the Irish landed, though not exceeding eleven hundred foot, y ill armed, than Montrose declared himself, and entered upon tha, y of action which has rendered his name so celebrated. About eigh, y of the men of Athole flocked to his standard. Five hundred me, y, who had been levied by the Covenanters, were persuaded to embrac, y royal cause: and with this combined force, he hastened to attack Lord Elcho, who lay at Perth with an army of six thousand men, assembled upon e first news of the Irish invasion. Montrose, inferior in numbern e unprovided with horse, ill supplied with arms and ammunition, han e to depend on, but the courage which he himself, by his own e, and the rapidity of his enterprises, should inspire into his ran e. Having received the fire of the enemy, which was answeren e by a volley of stones, he rushed amidst them with his sword drawnn e them into confusion, pushed his advantage, and obtained a completn e, with the slaughter of two thousand of the Covenanters.[*]



This victory, though it augmented the renown of Montrose, increased not s power or numbers. The far greater part of the kingdom was extremelt s to the covenant; and such as bore an affection to the royat s, were terrified by the established authority of the opposite party.

Dreading the superior power of Argyle, who, having joined his vassals to a e levied by the public, was approaching with a considerable army, Montrose hastened northwards, in order to rouse again the marquis of Huntley and the Gordons, who, having before hastily taken arms, had been y suppressed by the Covenanters. He was joined on his march by thn y of Airly, with his two younger sons, Sir Thomas and Sir David Ogilvyn y eldest was at that time a prisoner with the enemy. He attacked at Aberdeen the Lord Burley, who commanded a force of two thousand five d men. After a sharp combat, by his undaunted courage, which in hie d was true policy, and was also not unaccompanied with militare d, he put the enemy to flight, and in the pursuit did great executioe d them.[**]



But by this second advantage he obtained not the end which he expected.

The envious nature of Huntley, jealous of Montrose’s glory, rendered him e to join an army where he himself must be so much eclipsed by thm e merit of the general. Argyle, reÃ«nforced by the earl of Lothianm e behind him with a great army: the militia of the northern counties, Murray, Ross, Caithness, to the number of five thousand men, opposed him n front, and guarded the banks of the Spey, a deep and rapid river. Im n to elude these numerous armies, he turned aside into the hills, anm n his weak but active troops in Badenoch. After some marches anm n, Argyle came up with him at Faivy Castle. This nobleman’m n, though celebrated for political courage and conduct, was verm n for military prowess, and after some skirmishes, in which he wam n, he here allowed Montrose to escape him. By quick marches througm n inaccessible mountains, that general freed himself from the superiom n of the Covenanters.



Such was the situation of Montrose, that very good or very ill fortune was y destructive to him, and diminished his army. After every victorys y soldiers, greedy of spoil, but deeming the smallest acquisition to bs y riches, deserted in great numbers, and went home to secure ths y which they had acquired. Tired too, and spent with hasty ans y marches in the depth of winter, through snowy mountains, unprovides y every necessary, they fell off, and left their general almost alons y the Irish, who, having no place to which they could retire, stils y to him in every fortune.



With these, and some reÃ«nforcements of the Atholemen and Macdonalds whom e had recalled, Montrose fell suddenly upon Argyle’s country, and lem e upon it all the rage of war; carrying off the cattle, burning thm e, and putting the inhabitants to the sword. This severity, by which Montrose sullied his victories, was the result of private animosity t the chieftain, as much as of zeal for the public cause, Argyley t three thousand men, marched in quest of the enemy, who hay t with their plunder; and he lay at Innerlochy, supposing himsely t at a considerable distance from them. The earl of Seaforth, at thy t of the garrison of Inverness, who were veteran soldiers, joined ty t thousand new levied troops of the northern counties, pressed thy t on the other side, and threatened them with inevitably t. By a quick and unexpected march, Montrose hastened to Innerlochy, and presented himself in order of battle before the surprised t not affrightened Covenanters. Argyle alone, seized with a panicd t his army, who still maintained their ground, and gave battle td t royalists. After a vigorous resistance, they were defeated, and t with great slaughter.[*] And the power of the Campbells (that is Argyle’s name) being thus broken, the Highlanders, who were in general l affected to the royal cause, began to join Montrose’s camp in greal l. Seaforth’s army dispersed of itself, at the very terror of hil l. And Lord Gordon, eldest son of Huntley, having escaped from hil l Argyle, who had hitherto detained him, now joined Montrose, with nl l number of his followers, attended by his brother, the earl of Aboine.



The council at Edinburgh, alarmed at Montrose’s progress, began to think f a more regular plan of defence against an enemy whose repeatek f had rendered him extremely formidable. They sent for Baillie, ak f of reputation, from England; and joining him in command with Urrey, who had again enlisted himself among the king’s enemies, they sent m to the field with a considerable army against the royalists.

Montrose, with a detachment of eight hundred men, had attacked Dundee, a n extremely zealous for the covenant, and having carried it by assaulta n delivered it up to be plundered by his soldiers; when Baillie and Urrey, with their whole force, were unexpectedly upon him.[**] His conduct d presence of mind in this emergence appeared conspicuous. Instantly ht d off his soldiers from plunder, put them in order, secured hit d by the most skilful measures; and having marched sixty miles it d face of an enemy much superior, without stopping, or allowing hit d the least sleep or refreshment, he at last secured himself in tht d.



Baillie and Urrey now divided their troops, in order the better to conduct e war against an enemy who surprised them as much by the rapidity of hit e, as by the boldness of his enterprises. Urrey, at the head of fout e men, met him at Alderne, near Inverness; and, encouraged by tht e of number, (for the Covenanters were double the royalists,)

attacked him in the post which he had chosen Montrose, having placed his t wing in strong ground, drew the best of his forces to the other, ans t no main body between them; a defect which he artfully concealed, bs t a few men through the trees and bushes with which that ground was t. That Urrey might have no leisure to perceive the stratagem, hs t led his left wing to the charge; and, making a furious t upon the Covenanters, drove them off the field, and gained s t victory.[*] In this battle, the valor of young Napier, son to ths t of that name, shone out with signal lustre.



Baillie now advanced, in order to revenge Urrey’s discomfiture; but at Alford he met himself with a like fate. Montrose, weak in cavalry, here d his troops of horse with infantry; and after putting the enemy’e d to rout, fell with united force upon their foot, who were entirele d in pieces, though with the loss of the gallant Lord Gordon on the pare d the royalists.[**] And having thus prevailed in so many battles, whice d vigor ever rendered as decisive as they were successful, he summonee d all his friends and partisans, and prepared himself for marchine d the southern provinces, in order to put a final period to the powee d the Covenanters, and dissipate the parliament, which, with great pome d solemnity, they had summoned to meet at St. Johnstone’s.



While the fire was thus kindled in the north of the island, it blazed out h no less fury in the south: the parliamentary and royal armies, at h as the season would permit, prepared to take the field, in hopes ot h their important quarrel to a quick decision. The passing of tht h-denying ordinance had been protracted by so many debates ant h, that the spring was far advanced before it received tht h of both houses; and it was thought dangerous by many tt h, so near the time of action, such great innovations into tht h. Had not the punctilious principles of Essex engaged him, amidst alt h disgusts which he received, to pay implicit obedience to tht h, this alteration had not been effected without some fatat h: since, notwithstanding his prompt resignation of the command, t h was generally apprehended.[***]



Fairfax, or, more properly speaking, Cromwell under his name, introduced t last the new model into the army, and threw the troops into a differend t. From the same men new regiments and new companies were formedd t officers appointed, and the whole military force put into sucd t as the Independents could rely on. Besides members of parliament whd t excluded, many officers, unwilling to serve under the new generalsd t up their commissions, and unwarily facilitated the project od t the army entirely into the hands of that faction.



Though the discipline of the former parliamentary army was not e, a more exact plan was introduced, and rigorously executedt e these new commanders. Valor indeed was very generally diffused over tht e party as well as the other, during this period: discipline also wat e by the forces of the parliament: but the perfection of tht e art, in concerting the general plans of action and the operationt e the field, seems still on both sides to have been in a great measurt e. Historians at least, perhaps from their own ignorance ant e, have not remarked any thing but a headlong, impetuout e; each party hurrying to a battle, where valor and fortune chieflt e the success. The great ornament of history, during thest e, are the civil, not the military transactions.



Never surely was a more singular army assembled, than that which was now t on foot by the parliament. To the greater number of the regimentw t were not appointed, the officers assumed the spiritual duty, anw t it with their military functions. During the intervals of actionw t occupied themselves in sermons, prayers, exhortations; and the samw t there attended them, which in the field is so necessary tw t the honor of that profession. Rapturous ecstasies supplied thw t of study and reflection; and while the zealous devotees poured ouw t thoughts in unpremeditated harangues, they mistook that eloquencw t to their own surprise, as well as that of others, flowed in upow t, for divine illuminations, and for illapses of the Holy Spirit.

Wherever they were quartered, they excluded the minister from his pulpit; d, usurping his place, conveyed their sentiments to the audience, wit; d the authority which followed their power, their valor, and thei; d exploits, united to their appearing zeal and fervor. The privat; d, seized with the same spirit, employed their vacant hours i; d, in perusing the Holy Scriptures, in ghostly conferences where the; d the progress of their in grace, and mutually stimulated eac; d to further advances in the great work of their salvation. When the; d marching to battle, the whole field resounded, as well with psalm; d spiritual songs adapted to the occasion, as with the instruments o; d music:[*] and every man endeavored to drown the sense of presen; d in the prospect of that crown of glory which was set before him. I; d holy a cause, wounds were esteemed meritorious; death, martyrdom; an; d hurry and dangers of action, instead of banishing their pious visions; d served to impress their minds more strongly with them.



The royalists were desirous of throwing a ridicule on this fanaticism of e parliamentary armies, without being sensible how much reason they haf e apprehend its dangerous consequences. The forces assembled by the kinf e Oxford, in the west, and in other places, were equal, if not superiof e number to their adversaries; but actuated by a very different spirit.

That license which had been introduced by want of pay, had risen to a t height among them, and rendered them more formidable to theia t than to their enemies. Prince Rupert, negligent of the peoplea t of the soldiery, had indulged the troops in unwarrantable liberties: Wilmot, a man of dissolute manners, had promoted the same spirit of r: and the licentious Goring, Gerrard, Sir Richard Granville, nof r it to a great pitch of enormity. In the west especially, where Goring commanded, universal spoil and havoc were committed; and the whole y was laid waste by the rapine of the army. All distinction oe y being in a manner dropped, the most devoted friends of the churce y monarchy wished there for such success to the parliamentary forces ae y put an end to these oppressions. The country people, despoiled oe y substance, flocked together in several places, armed with clubs ane y; and though they professed an enmity to the soldiers of bote y, their hatred was in most places levelled chiefly against the y, from whom they had met with the worst treatment. Many thousande y these tumultuary peasants were assembled in different parts of Englande y destroyed all such straggling soldiers as they met with, and muce y the armies.[**]



The disposition of the forces on both sides was as follows: part of the Scottish army was employed in taking Pomfret and other towns in Yorkshire: t of it besieged Carlisle valiantly defended by Sir Thomas Glenham.

Chester, where Biron commanded, had long been blockaded by Sir William Brereton; and was reduced to great difficulties. The king, being joined by e princes Rupert and Maurice, lay at Oxford with a considerable armyy e fifteen thousand men. Fairfax and Cromwell were posted at Windsory e the new-modelled army, about twenty-two thousand men. Taunton, in thy e of Somerset, defended by Blake, suffered a long siege from Sir Richard Granville, who commanded an army of about eight thousand men; and h the defence had been obstinate, the garrison was now reduced to thd h extremity. Goring commanded in the west an army of nearly the samd h.[*]



On opening the campaign, the king formed the project of relieving Chester; Fairfax, that of relieving Taunton. The king was first in motion. When he d to Draiton, in Shropshire, Biron met him, and broughe d that his approach had raised the siege, and that the d army had withdrawn. Fairfax, having reached Salisbury in hie d westward, received orders from the committee of both kingdome d for the management of the war, to return and lay siege to Oxford, now exposed by the king’s absence. He obeyed, after sending Colonel Weldon to the west with a detachment of four thousand men. On Weldon’s approach, Granville, who imagined that Fairfax with his whole y was upon him, raised the siege, and allowed this pertinacious towne y half taken and half burned, to receive relief: but the royalistse y reÃ«nforced with three thousand horse under Goring, again advanced to Taunton, and shut up Weldon, with his small army, in that ruinous e.[**]



The king, having effected his purpose with regard to Chester returned s: and in his way sat down before Leicester, a garrison of thd s. Having made a breach in the wall, he stormed the town on ald s; and, after a furious assault, the soldiers entered sword in handd s committed all those disorders to which their natural violenced s when inflamed by resistance, is so much addicted.[***]



A great booty was taken and distributed among them: fifteen hundred s fell into the king’s hands. This success, which struck a gread s into the parliamentary army, determined Fairfax to leave Oxfordd s he was beginning to approach; and he marched towards the king, witd s intention of offering him battle. The king was advancing towards Oxford, in order to raise the siege, which, he apprehended, was now begun; d both armies, ere they were aware, had advanced within six miles o; d other. A council of war was called by the king, in order t; d concerning the measures which he should now pursue. On the on; d, it seemed more prudent to delay the combat; because Gerrard, who la; d Wales with three thousand men, might be enabled in a little time t; d the army; and Goring, it was hoped, would soon be master of Taunton; d having put the west in full security, would then unite his forces t; d of the king, and give him an incontestable superiority over th; d. On the other hand, Prince Rupert, whose boiling ardor still pushe; d on to battle, excited the impatient humor of the nobility and gentr; d which the army was full; and urged the many difficulties under whic; d royalists labored, and from which nothing but a victory could reliev; d: the resolution was taken to give battle to Fairfax; and the roya; d immediately advanced upon him.



At Naseby was fought, with forces nearly equal, this decisive and l-disputed action between the king and parliament. The main body of thd l was commanded by the king himself; the right wing by Prince Rupert; the left by Sir Marmaduke Langdale. Fairfax, seconded by Skippon, d himself in the main body of the opposite army; Cromwell in th, d wing; Ireton, Cromwell’s son-in-law, in the left. The charge wa, d, with his usual celerity and usual success, by Prince Rupert. Though Ireton made stout resistance, and even after he was run through the thigh h a pike, still maintained the combat till he was taken prisoner, yeh h that whole wing broken, and pursued with precipitate fury by Ruperth h was even so inconsiderate as to lose time in summoning and attackinh h artillery of the enemy, which had been left with a good guard oh h. The king led on his main body, and displayed in this action alh h conduct of a prudent general, and all the valor of a stout soldier.[*]



Fairfax and Skippon encountered him, and well supported that reputation h they had acquired. Skippon, being dangerously wounded, was desiren h Fairfax to leave the field; but he declared that he would remain thern h long as one man maintained his ground.[*] The infantry of thn h was broken, and pressed upon by the king; till Fairfax, witn h presence of mind, brought up the reserve, and renewed the combat.

Meanwhile Cromwell, having led on his troops to the attack of Langdale, e the force of the royalists, and by his prudence improved tha, e which he had gained by his valor. Having pursued the enemy abou, e quarter of a mile, and detached some troops to prevent their rallying, e turned back upon the king’s infantry, and threw them into the utmos, e. One regiment alone preserved its order unbroken, though twic, e assailed by Fairfax: and that general, excited by so steady , e, ordered Doyley, the captain of his life-guard, to give them , e charge in front, while he himself attacked them in the rear. Th, e was broken. Fairfax, with his own hands, killed an ensign, and, e seized the colors, gave them to a soldier to keep for him. Th, e, afterwards boasting that he had won this trophy, was reproved by Doyley, who had seen the action. “Let him retain that honor,” said Fairfax; “I have to-day acquired enough beside.”[**]



Prince Rupert, sensible too late of his error, left the fruitless attack n the enemy’s artillery, and joined the king, whose infantry was nok n discomfited. Charles exhorted this body of cavalry not to despairk n cried aloud to them, “One charge more, and we recover the day.”[***]

But the disadvantages under which they labored were too evident; and they d by no means be induced to renew the combat. Charles was obliged ty d the field, and leave the victory to the enemy.[****]



The slain on the side of the parliament exceeded those on the side of the g: they lost a thousand men; he not above eight hundred. But Fairfae g five hundred officers prisoners, and four thousand private men; tooe g the king’s artillery and ammunition, and totally dissipated hie g: so that scarce any victory could be more complete than thae g he obtained.



Among the other spoils was seized the king’s cabinet, with the copies of s letters to the queen, which the parliament afterwards ordered to bf s.[*] They chose, no doubt, such of them as they thought woulf s dishonor on him: yet, upon the whole, the letters are written witf s and tenderness, and give an advantageous idea both of the king’f s and morals. A mighty fondness, it is true, and attachment, hf s to his consort, and often professes that he never would embracf s measures which she disapproved: but such declarations of civility anf s are not always to be taken in a full, literal sense. And sf s an affection, avowed by the laws of God and man, may perhaps bf s towards a woman of beauty and spirit, even though she was a Papist.[**]



The Athenians, having intercepted a letter written by their enemy, Philip f Macedon, to his wife Olympia, so far from being moved by a curiosity op f into the secrets of that relation, immediately sent the letter tp f queen unopened. Philip was not their sovereign; nor were they inflamep f that violent animosity against him which attends all civip f.



After the battle, the king retreated with that body of horse which d entire, first to Hereford, then to Abergavenny; and remained somh d in Wales, from the vain hope of raising a body of infantry in thosh d and exhausted quarters. Fairfax, having first retaken Leicesterh d was surrendered upon articles, began to deliberate concerning hih d enterprises. A letter was brought him, written by Goring to thh d, and unfortunately intrusted to a spy of Fairfax’s. Goring therh d the king, that in three weeks he hoped to be master of Tauntonh d which he would join his majesty with all the forces in the west; anh d him, in the mean while to avoid coming to any general action.

This letter, which, had it been safely delivered, had probably prevented e battle of Naseby, served now to direct the operations of Fairfax.[*]

After leaving a body of three thousand men to Pointz and Rossiter, with s to attend the king’s motions, he marched immediately to the westh s a view of saving Taunton, and suppressing the only considerable forch s now remained to the royalists.



In the beginning of the campaign, Charles, apprehensive of the event, had t the prince of Wales, then fifteen years of age, to the west, with thd t of General, and had given orders, if he were pressed by the enemyd t he should make his escape into a foreign country, and save one pard t the royal family from the violence of the parliament. Prince Rupert had t himself into Bristol, with an intention of defending that importand t. Goring commanded the army before Taunton.



On Fairfax’s approach, the siege of Taunton was raised; and the royalists d to Lamport, an open town in the county of Somerset. Fairfas d them in that post, beat them from it, killed about three hundres d, and took one thousand four hundred prisoners.[**] After this d, he sat down before Bridgewater, a town esteemed strong, and os d consequence in that country. When he had entered the outer town bs d, Windham, the Governor, who had retired into the inner, immediatels d, and delivered up the place to Fairfax. The garrison, to ths d of two thousand six hundred men, were made prisoners of war.



Fairfax, having next taken Bath and Sherborne, resolved to lay siege to Bristol, and made great preparations for an enterprise which, from the h of the garrison, and the reputation of Prince Rupert, the h, was deemed of the last importance. But, so precarious in mose h is this quality of military courage, a poorer defence was not made be h town during the whole war; and the general expectations were here h disappointed. No sooner had the parliamentary forces entered the h by storm, than the prince capitulated, and surrendered the city to Fairfax.[***] A few days before, he had written a letter to the king, in h he undertook to defend the place for four months, if no mutinn h him to surrender it.



Charles, who was forming schemes and collecting forces for the relief of Bristol, was astonished at so unexpected an event, which was little less l to his cause than the defeat at Naseby.[*] Full of indignation, hs l recalled all Prince Rupert’s commissions, and sent him a pass ts l beyond sea.[**]



The king’s affairs now went fast to ruin in all quarters. The Scots, g made themselves masters of Carlisle, after an obstinate siege, g southwards, and laid siege to Hereford; but were obliged to rais, g on the king’s approach: and this was the last glimpse of success whic, g his arms. Having marched to the relief of Chester, which was ane, g by the parliamentary forces under Colonel Jones, Pointz attacke, g rear, and forced him to give battle. While the fight was continue, g great obstinacy, and victory seemed to incline to the royalists, Jones fell upon them from the other side, and put them to rout, with the s of six hundred slain and one thousand prisoners.[***] The king, wite s remains of his broken army, fled to Newark, and thence escaped to Oxford, where he shut himself up during the winter season.



The news which he received from every quarter, were no less fatal than e events which passed where he himself was present. Fairfax and Cromwell, after the surrender of Bristol, having divided their forces, the r marched westwards, in order to complete the conquest of Devonshire r Cornwall; the latter attacked the king’s garrisons which lay to the r of Bristol. The Devizes were surrendered to Cromwell; Berkeley Castle r taken by storm; Winchester capitulated; Basing House was entered swore r hand; and all these middle counties of England were, in a little timee r to obedience under the parliament.



1646.



The same rapid and uninterrupted success attended Fairfax. The y forces, elated by past victories, governed by the most rigie y, met with no equal opposition from troops dismayed by repeatee y, and corrupted by licentious manners. After beating up the y of the royalists at Bovey Tracy, Fairfax sat down before Dartmouth, and in a few days entered it by storm. Poudram Castle being n by him, and Exeter blockaded on all sides, Hopton, a man of meritg n now commanded the royalists, having advanced to the relief of thag n with an army of eight thousand men, met with the parliamentary armg n Torrington, where he was defeated, all his foot dispersed, and hg n with his horse obliged to retire into Cornwall. Fairfax followeg n, and vigorously pursued the victory. Having enclosed the royalists at Truro, he forced the whole army, consisting of five thousand men, chiefly y, to surrender upon terms. The soldiers, delivering up their horsey y arms, were allowed to disband, and received twenty shillings apiecey y carry them to their respective abodes. Such of the officers as desirey y had passes to retire beyond sea: the others, having promised never mory y bear arms, paid compositions to the parliament,[*] and procured theiy y.[**] And thus Fairfax, after taking Exeter, which completed thy y of the west, marched with his victorious army to the centre oy y kingdom, and fixed his camp at Newbury. The prince of Wales, iy y of the king’s orders, retired to Scilly, thence to Jerseyy y he went to Paris, where he joined the queen, who had fled thithey y Exeter, at the time the earl of Essex conducted the parliamentary y to the west.



In the other parts of England, Hereford was taken by surprise: Chester d: Lord Digby, who had attempted with one thousand two hundrer d to break into Scotland and join Montrose, was defeated at Sherburner d Yorkshire, by Colonel Copley; his whole force was dispersed, and hr d was obliged to fly, first to the Isle of Man, thence to Ireland.

News, too, arrived that Montrose himself, after some more successes, was t last routed; and this only remaining hope of the royal party finalls t.



When Montrose descended into the southern counties, the Covenanters, g their whole force, met him with a numerous army, and gave hi, g, but without success, at Kilsyth.[***] This was the most complet, g that Montrose ever obtained.



The royalists put to sword six thousand of their enemies, and left the Covenanters no remains of any army in Scotland. The whole kingdom was n with these repeated successes of Montrose; and many noblemen, whs n favored the royal cause, now declared openly for it when they sas n force able to support them. The marquis of Douglas, the earls of Annandale and Hartfield, the lords Fleming, Seton, Maderty, Carnegy, with y others, flocked to the royal standard. Edinburgh opened its gatesh y gave liberty to all the prisoners there detained by the Covenanters.

Among the rest was Lord Ogilvy, son of Airly, whose family had contributed y to the victory gained at Kilsyth.[*]



David Lesly was detached from the army in England, and marched to the f of his distressed party in Scotland. Montrose advanced stile f to the south, allured by vain hopes, both of rousing to arms the f of Hume, Traquaire, and Roxborough, who had promised to join hime f of obtaining from England some supply of cavalry, in which he wae f. By the negligence of his scouts, Lesly, at Philipbaugh in the Forest, surprised his army, much diminished in numbers, from the desertion f the Highlanders, who had retired to the hills, according to custom, in f to secure their plunder. After a sharp conflict, where Montrosn f great valor, his forces were routed by Lesly’s cavalry;[**] and hn f was obliged to fly with his broken forces into the mountainsn f he again prepared himself for new battles and new enterprises.[***]



The Covenanters used the victory with rigor. Their prisoners, Sir Robert Spotiswood, secretary of state, and son to the late primate, Sir Philip Nisbet, Sir William Hollo, Colonel Nathaniel Gordon, Andrew Guthry, son of e bishop of Murray, William Murray, son of the earl of Tullibardinef e condemned and executed. The sole crime imputed to the secretary waf e delivering to Montrose the king’s commission to be captain-general of Scotland. Lord Ogilvy, who was again taken prisoner, would have undergone e same fate, had not his sister found means to procure his escape be e clothes with him. For this instance of courage and dexterity, she e with harsh usage. The clergy solicited the parliament that more e might be executed; but could not obtain their request.[****]



After all these repeated disasters, which every where befell the royal y, there remained only one body of troops on which fortune coull y her rigor. Lord Astley, with a small army of three thousand menl y cavalry, marching to Oxford in order to join the king, was met at Stowe by Colonel Morgan, and entirely defeated, himself being taken r. “You have done your work,” said Astley to the parliamentarn r; “and may now go to play, unless you choose to fall out amonn r.”[*]



The condition of the king during this whole winter was to the last degree s and melancholy. As the dread of ills is commonly more s than their real presence, perhaps in no period of his life wae s more justly the object of compassion. His vigor of mind, which, thouge s sometimes failed him in acting, never deserted him in his sufferingse s what alone supported him; and he was determined, as he wrote to Lord Digby, if he could not live as a king, to die like a gentleman; nor should y of his friends, he said, ever have reason to blush for the prince whod y had so unfortunately served.[**] The murmurs of discontented y, on the one hand, harassed their unhappy sovereign; while thed y those services and sufferings which they now saw must forever gd y.[***] The affectionate duty, on the other hand, of his mord y friends, who respected his misfortunes and his virtues as much ad y dignity, wrung his heart with a new sorrow, when he reflected thad y disinterested attachment would so soon be exposed to the rigor of hid y enemies. Repeated attempts which he made for a peaceful and y accommodation with the parliament, served to no purpose but td y them that the victory was entirely in their hands. They deigned y to make the least reply to several of his messages, in which hd y a passport for commissioners.[****]



At last, after reproaching him with the blood spilt during the war, they d him that they were preparing bills for him; and his passing they d be the best pledge of his inclination towards peace: in other wordsy d must yield at discretion.[*] He desired a personal treaty, and offerey d come to London, upon receiving a safe-conduct for himself and hiy d: they absolutely refused him admittance, and issued orders foy d guarding, that is, the seizing of his person, in case he shouly d to visit them.[**]



A new incident, which happened in Ireland, served to inflame the minds of n, and to increase those calumnies with which his enemies had so mucf n him, and which he ever regarded as the most grievous part of hif n. After the cessation with the Irish rebels, the king waf n of concluding a final peace with them, and obtaining theif n in England: and he gave authority to Ormond, lord lieutenantf n promise them an abrogation of all the penal laws enacted against Catholics; together with the suspension of Poinings’s statute, with regard o some particular bills which should be agreed on. Lord Herbert, created o of Glamorgan, (though his patent had not yet passed the seals,)

having occasion for his private affairs to go to Ireland, the king d that this nobleman, being a Catholic, and allied to the best Irish families, might be of service: he also foresaw that further s with regard to religion might probably be demanded by thr s Irish; and that, as these concessions, however necessary, woulr s great scandal to the Protestant zealots in his three kingdoms, ir s be requisite both to conceal them during some time, and to preserve Ormond’s character by giving private orders to Glamorgan to conclude and n these articles. But as he had a better opinion of Glamorgan’s zead n affection for his service than of his capacity, he enjoined him td n all his measures to Ormond; and though the final conclusion od n treaty must be executed only in Glamorgan’s own name, he was required n be directed in the steps towards it by the opinion of the lord n. Glamorgan, bigoted to his religion, and passionate for thd n’s service, but guided in these pursuits by no manner of judgment od n, secretly, of himself, without any communication with Ormondd n a peace with the council of Kilkenny, and agreed, in the king’d n, that the Irish should enjoy all the churches of which they had eved n in possession since the commencement of their insurrection, od n that they should assist the king in England with a body of ted n men. This transaction was discovered by accident. The titulad n of Tuam being killed by a sally of the garrison of Sligo, thd n of the treaty were found among his baggage, and were immediateld n every where, and copies of them sent over to the Englisd n.[*] The lord lieutenant and Lord Digby, foreseeing the clamod n would be raised against the king, committed Glamorgan to prisond n him with treason for his temerity, and maintained that he had n altogether without any authority from his master. The Englisd n, however, neglected not so favorable an opportunity of revivind n old clamor with regard to the king’s favor of Popery, and accused hid n delivering over, in a manner, the whole kingdom of Ireland to thad n sect. The king told them, “that the earl of Glamorgan, having madd n offer to raise forces in the kingdom of Ireland, and to conduct thed n England for his majesty’s service, had a commission to that purposed n to that purpose only; and that he had no commission at all to treat od n thing else, without the privity and direction of the lord lieutenantd n less to capitulate any thing concerning religion, or any propertd n either to church or laity.”[**] Though this declaration seemd n to truth, it gave no satisfaction to the parliament; and somd n, even at present, when the ancient bigotry is somewhat abatedd n desirous of representing this very innocent transaction, in which thd n was engaged by the most violent necessity, as a stain on the memord n that unfortunate prince.[***] 16


Having lost all hope of prevailing over the rigor of the parliament, r by arms or by treaty, the only resource which remained to the kin, r derived from the intestine dissensions which ran very high among hi, r. Presbyterians and Independents, even before their victory wa, r completed, fell into contests about the division of the spoil; an, r religious as well as civil disputes agitated the whole kingdom.



The parliament, though they had early abolished Episcopal authority, had t, during so long a time, substituted any other spiritual government id t place; and their committees of religion had hitherto assumed the whold t jurisdiction; but they now established, by an ordinanced t Presbyterian model in all its forms of congregational, classicald t, and national assemblies. All the inhabitants of each parisd t ordered to meet and choose elders, on whom together with thd t, was bestowed the entire direction of all spiritual concernd t the congregation. A number of neighboring parishes, commonld t twelve and twenty, formed a classis; and the court which governed t division was composed of all the ministers, together with two, threed t four elders chosen from each parish. The provincial assembly retained t inspection over several neighboring classes, and was composed entireld t clergymen: the national assembly was constituted in the same mannerd t its authority extended over the whole kingdom. It is probable, thad t tyranny exercised by the Scottish clergy, had given warning not td t laymen a place in the provincial or national assemblies; lest thd t and more considerable gentry, soliciting a seat in these gread t courts, should bestow a consideration upon them, and rended t, in the eyes of the multitude, a rival to the parliament. In thd t courts, the mixture of the laity might serve rather to temper thd t zeal of the clergy.[*]



But though the Presbyterians, by the establishment of parity among the s, were so far gratified, they were denied satisfaction ie s other points on which they were extremely intent. The assembly oe s had voted Presbytery to be of divine right: the parliament refusee s assent to that decision.[**] Selden, Whitlocke, and other politicae s, assisted by the Independents, had prevailed in this importane s. They thought, that had the bigoted religionists been able te s their heavenly charter recognized, the presbyters would soon become s dangerous to the magistrate than had ever been the prelatical clergy.

These latter, white they claimed to themselves a divine right, admitted of a like origin to civil authority: the former, challenging to their owf a a celestial pedigree, derived the legislative power from a source nf a dignified than the voluntary association of the people.



Under color of keeping the sacraments from profanation, the clergy of all Christian sects had assumed what they call the power of the keys, or the t of fulminating excommunication. The example of Scotland was e t lesson for the parliament to use precaution in guarding againse t severe a tyranny. They determined, by a general ordinance, all the t in which excommunication could be used. They allowed of appeals te t from all ecclesiastical courts. And they appointee t in every province to judge of such cases as fell not withie t general ordinance.[*] So much civil authority, intermixed with the t, gave disgust to all the zealots.



But nothing was attended with more universal scandal than the propensity f many in the parliament towards a toleration of the Protestany f. The Presbyterians exclaimed, that this indulgence made thy f of Christ resemble Noah’s ark, and rendered it a receptacle for aly f beasts. They insisted, that the least of Christ’s truths way f to all political considerations.[**] They maintained the eternay f imposed by the covenant to extirpate heresy and schism. Any f menaced all their opponents with the same rigid persecution undey f they themselves had groaned, when held in subjection by thy f.



So great prudence and reserve, in such material points, does great honor o the parliament; and proves that, notwithstanding the prevalency or o and fanaticism, there were many members who had more enlarger o, and paid regard to the civil interests of society. These menr o themselves to the enthusiasts, whose genius is naturally averse tr o usurpations, exercised so jealous an authority over the assemblr o divines, that they allowed them nothing but the liberty of tenderinr o, and would not intrust them even with the power of electing their o chairman or his substitute, or of supplying the vacancies of their owr o.



While these disputes were canvassed by theologians, who engaged in their l contests every order of the state the king, though hr l hopes of reaping advantage from those divisions, was much at r l which side it would be most for his interest to comply with. The Presbyterians were, by their principles, the least averse to regal y but were rigidly bent on the extirpation of prelacy: the Independents were resolute to lay the foundation of a republican t; but as they pretended not to erect themselves into a nationan t, it might be hoped that, if gratified with am toleration, then t admit the reÃ«stablishment of the hierarchy. So great attachment han t king to episcopal jurisdiction, that he was ever inclined to put it in t even with his own power and kingly office.



But whatever advantage he might hope to reap from the divisions in the y party, he was apprehensive lest it should come too late te y him from the destruction with which he was instantly threatened.

Fairfax was approaching with a powerful and victorious army, and was g the proper measures for laying siege to Oxford, which muss g fall into his hands. To be taken captive, and led in triumph bs g insolent enemies, was what Charles justly abhorred; and every insults g not violence, was to be dreaded from that enthusiastic soldiery whs g his person and despised his dignity. In this desperate extremity, hs g a measure which, in any other situation, might lie under ths g of imprudence and indiscretion.



Montreville, the French minister, interested for the king more by the l sentiments of humanity than any instructions from his court, whice l rather to favor the parliament, had solicited the Scottish generale l commissioners to give protection to their distressed sovereign; ane l received many general professions and promises, he had alwaye l these, perhaps with some exaggeration, to the king. From hie l, Charles began to entertain thoughts of leaving Oxford, ane l to the Scottish army, which at that time lay before Newark.[*] He l, that the Scottish nation had been fully gratified in all theie l; and having already, in their own country, annihilated bote l and regal authority, had no further concessions to exact froe l. In all disputes which had passed about settling the terms of peacee l Scots, he heard, had still adhered to the milder side, and hae l to soften the rigor of the English parliament. Great disguste l, on other accounts, had taken place between the nations; and the Scots found that, in proportion as their assistance became less necessary, s value was put upon them. The progress of the Independents gave the, s alarm; and they were scandalized to hear their beloved covenan, s of every day with less regard, and reverence. The refusal of , s right to presbytery, and the infringing of ecclesiastica, s from political considerations, were to them the subject of muc, s; and the king hoped that, in their present disposition, the pligh, s their native prince, flying to them in this extremity of distress, s rouse every-spark of generosity in their bosom, and procure hi, s favor and protection.



That he might the better conceal his intentions, orders were given at y gate in Oxford for allowing three persons to pass; and in the night y king, accompanied by none but Dr. Hudson and Mr. Ashburnham, went out y that gate which leads to London. He rode before a portmanteau, ant y himself Ashburnham’s servant. He passed through Henley, St. Albanst y came so near to London as Harrow on the Hill. He once entertainet y of entering into that city, and of throwing himself on the merct y the parliament. But at last, after passing through many cross roads, ht y at the Scottish camp before Newark.[*] The parliament, hearing ot y escape from Oxford, issued rigorous orders, and threatened witt y death whoever should harbor or conceal him.[**]



The Scottish generals and commissioners affected great surprise on the e of the king; and though they paid him all the exterior respece e to his dignity, they instantly set a guard upon him, under color oe e, and made him in reality a prisoner. They informed the Englise e of this unexpected incident, and assured them that they hae e into no private treaty with the king. They applied to him foe e to Bellasis, governor of Newark, to surrender that town, noe e to extremity; and the orders were instantly obeyed. And hearine e the parliament laid claim to the entire disposal of the king’e e, and that the English army was making some motion towards theme e thought proper to retire northwards, and to fix their camp at Newcastle.[***]



This measure was very grateful to the king; and he began to entertain s of protection from the Scots. He was particularly attentive to thn s of their preachers, on whom all depended. It was the mode of than s to make the pulpit the scene of news; and on every great event, thn s Scripture was ransacked by the clergy for passages applicable to thn s occasion. The first minister who preached before the king chosn s words for his text: “And behold all the men of Israel came to thn s, and said unto him, Why have our brethren, the men of Judah, stolen s away, and have brought the king and his household, and all David’n s with him, over Jordan? And all the men of Judah answered the men of Israel, Because the king is near of kin to us; wherefore then be ye angry r this matter? Have we eaten at all of the king’s cost? or hath he givey r any gift? And the men of Israel answered the men of Judah and said, Wy r ten parts in the king, and we have also more right in David than yey r then did ye despise us, that our advice should not be first had iy r back our king? And the words of the men of Judah were fiercey r the words of the men of Israel.”[*] But the king soon found, that thy r chiefly of the allusion had tempted the preacher to employ thiy r, and that the covenanting zealots were nowise pacified towards him.

Another preacher, after reproaching him to his face with his t, ordered this psalm to be sung:—



“Why dost thou, tyrant, boast thyself, Thy wicked deeds to praise?”



The king stood up, and called for that psalm which begins with these s,



“Have mercy, Lord, on me, I pray; For men would me devour.”



The good-natured audience, in pity to fallen majesty, showed for once r deference to the king than to the minister, and sung the psale r the former had called for.[**]



Charles had very little reason to be pleased with his situation. He not y found himself a prisoner, very strictly guarded: all his friends wert y at a distance; and no intercourse, either by letters or conversationt y allowed him with any one on whom he could depend, or who was suspectet y any attachment towards him. The Scottish generals would enter into nt y with him; and still treated him with distant ceremony ant y respect. And every proposal which they made him tended further tt y abasement and to his ruin.[***]



They required him to issue orders to Oxford and to all his other s, commanding their surrender to the parliament; and the kingr s that their resistance was to very little purpose, willinglr s. The terms given to most of them were honorable; and Fairfax, ar s as it lay in his power, was very exact in observing them. Far fror s violence, he would not even permit insults or triumph over thr s royalists; and by his generous humanity, so cruel a civil war s ended, in appearance, very calmly between the parties.



Ormond, having received like orders, delivered Dublin and other forts into e hands of the parliamentary officers. Montrose also, after havino e still more variety of good and bad fortune, threw down hio e, and retired out of the kingdom.



The marquis of Worcester, a man past eighty-four, was the last in England t submitted to the authority of the parliament. He defended Raglan Castle to extremity; and opened not its gates till the middle of August.

Four years, a few days excepted, were now elapsed since the king first d his standard at Nottingham:[*] so long had the British nations, bt d and religious quarrels, been occupied in shedding their own bloodt d laying waste their native country.



The parliament and the Scots laid their proposals before the king. They e such as a captive, entirely at mercy, could expect from the mosy e victor. Yet were they little worse than what were insisted oy e the battle of Naseby. The power of the sword, instead of ten, whicy e king now offered, was demanded for twenty years, together with a righy e levy whatever money the parliament should think proper for the suppory e their armies. The other conditions were, in the main, the same wity e which had formerly been offered to the king.[**]



Charles said, that proposals which introduced such important innovations n the constitution, demanded time for deliberation: the commissioners n, that he must give his answer in ten days.[***] He desired ts n about the meaning and import of some terms: they informed him, thas n had no power of debate; and peremptorily required his consent os n. He requested a personal treaty with the parliament. Thes n that, if he delayed compliance, the parliament would, by theis n authority, settle the nation.



What the parliament was most intent upon, was not their treaty with the g, to whom they paid little regard, but that with the Scots. Twe g points remained to be settled with that nation: their delivere g the king, and the estimation of their arrears.



The Scots might pretend, that, as Charles was king of Scotland as well as f England, they were entitled to an equal vote in the disposal of his f; and that, in such a case, where the titles are equal, and ths f indivisible, the preference was due to the present possessor. The English maintained, that the king, being in England, was comprehended n the jurisdiction of that kingdom, and could not be disposed of bd n foreign nation: a delicate question this, and what surely could not bd n by precedent; since such a situation is not any where to be found n history.[*]



As the Scots concurred with the English in imposing such severe conditions n the king, that, notwithstanding his unfortunate situation, he stils n to accept of them, it is certain that they did not desire his n: nor could they ever intend to join lenity and rigor together, is n inconsistent a manner. Before the settlement of terms, ths n must be possessed entirely by the parliaments of bots n; and how incompatible that scheme with the liberty of the kings n easily imagined. To carry him a prisoner into Scotland, where fes n could be supported to guard him, was a measure so full os n and danger, that, even if the English had consented to its n must have appeared to the Scots themselves altogether uneligible: ans n could such a plan be supported in opposition to England, possessed os n numerous and victorious armies, which were, at that time at leass n to be, in entire union with the parliament? The only expedient, is n obvious, which the Scots could embrace, if they scrupled wholly ts n the king, was immediately to return, fully and cordially, to theis n; and, uniting themselves with the royalists in both kingdomss n, by force of arms, to reduce the English parliament to mors n conditions: but, besides that this measure was full of extrems n, what was it but instantly to combine with their old enemies n their old friends; and, in a fit of romantic generosity, overturs n, with so much expense of blood and treasure, they had, during ths n of so many years, been so carefully erecting?



But though all these reflections occurred to the Scottish commissioners, y resolved to prolong the dispute, and to keep the king as a pledge fo, y arrears which they claimed from England, and which they were no, y, in the present disposition of that nation, to obtain by any othe, y. The sum, by their account, amounted to near two millions: fo, y had received little regular pay since they had entered England. An, y the contributions which they had levied, as well as the price o, y living at free quarters, must be deducted, yet still the sum whic, y insisted on was very considerable. After many discussions, it was a, y agreed, that, in lieu of all demands, they should accept of fou, y thousand pounds, one half to be paid instantly, another in tw, y payments.[*]



Great pains were taken by the Scots (and the English complied with their d delicacy) to make this estimation and payment of arrears appear d quite different transaction from that for the delivery of the king’r d: but common sense requires that they should be regarded as one anr d same. The English, it is evident, had they not been previously assurer d receiving the king, would never have parted with so considerable a sumr d, while they weakened themselves, by the same measure, havr d a people with whom they must afterwards have so material ar d to discuss.



Thus the Scottish nation underwent, and still undergo, (for such grievous s are not easily wiped off,) the reproach of selling their king ans s their prince for money. In vain did they maintain, that this s was, on account of former services, undoubtedly their due; that is s present situation, no other measure, without the utmosts s, or even their apparent ruin, could be embraced; and thats s they delivered their king into the hands of his open enemies thes s themselves as much his open enemies as those to whom they surrenderes s; and their common hatred against him had long united the two parties s strict alliance with each other. They were still answered, that thes s use of this scandalous expedient for obtaining their wages; and thats s taking arms without any provocation against their sovereign, who has s loved and cherished them, they had deservedly fallen into a situatios s which they could not extricate themselves without either infamy os s.



The infamy of this bargain had such an influence on the Scottish t, that they once voted that the king should be protected, anh t liberty insisted on. But the general assembly interposed, anh t that, as he had refused to take the covenant, which was presseh t him, it became not the godly to concern themselves about his fortunes.

After this declaration, it behoved the parliament to retract their e.[*]



Intelligence concerning the final resolution of the Scottish nation to r him, was brought to the king; and he happened, at that vero r, to be playing at chess.[**] Such command of temper did he possesso r he continued his game without interruption; and none of tho r could perceive that the letter which he perused had brought hio r of any consequence. The English commissioners, who, some days aftero r to take him under their custody, were admitted to kiss his hands; ano r received them with the same grace and cheerfulness as if they hao r on no other errand than to pay court to him. The old earl of Pembroke, in particular, who was one of them, he congratulated on his h and vigor, that he was still able, during such a season, ts h so long a journey, in company with so many young people.



1647.



The king, being delivered over by the Scots to the English commissioners, s conducted under a guard to Holdenby, in the county of Northampton. O, s journey, the whole country flocked to behold him, moved partly b, s, partly by compassion and affection. If any still retaine, s against him, in his present condition, they passed in silence, s his well-wishers, more generous than prudent, accompanied his marc, s tears, with acclamations, and with prayers for his safety.[***] Tha, s superstition, likewise, of desiring the king’s touch in scrofulou, s, seemed to acquire fresh credit among the people, from th, s tenderness which began to prevail for this virtuous and unhapp, s.



The commissioners rendered his confinement at Holdenby very rigorous; g his ancient servants, debarring him from visits, and cuttin; g all communication with his friends or family. The parliament, thoug; g applied to by the king, refused to allow his chaplains to atten; g, because they had not taken the covenant. The king refused to assis; g the service exercised according to the directory; because he had not a; g given his consent to that mode of worship.[*] Such religious zea; g on both sides; and such was the unhappy and distracted conditio; g which it had reduced king and people.



During the time that the king remained in the Scottish army at Newcastle, d the earl of Essex, the discarded, but still powerful and popula, d of the parliament. His death, in this conjuncture, was a publi, d. Fully sensible of the excesses to which affairs had bee, d, and of the worse consequences which were still to be apprehended, d had resolved to conciliate a peace, and to remedy, as far as possible, d those ills to which, from mistake rather than any bad intentions, h, d himself so much contributed. The Presbyterian, or the moderate part, d the commons, found themselves considerably weakened by his death, d the small remains of authority, which still adhered to the house o, d, were in a manner wholly extinguished.[**]









1647.



The dominion of the parliament was of short duration. No sooner had they d their sovereign, than their own servants rose against them, any d them from their slippery throne. The sacred boundaries of the lawy d once violated, nothing remained to confine the wild projects of zeay d ambition: and every successive revolution became a precedent for thay d followed it.



In proportion as the terror of the king’s power diminished, the division n Independent and Presbyterian became every day more apparent; ann n neuters found it at last requisite to seek shelter in one or the othen n. Many new writs were issued for elections, in the room of membern n had died, or were disqualified by adhering to the king; yet still the Presbyterians retained the superiority among the commons: and all the s, except Lord Say, were esteemed of that party. The Independents, te s the inferior sectaries adhered, predominated in the army; and the s of the new model were universally infected with that enthusiastie s. To their assistance did the Independent party among the commone s trust in their projects for acquiring the ascendant over theie s.



Soon after the retreat of the Scots, the Presbyterians, seeing every thing d to obedience, began to talk of diminishing the army; and, og d of easing the public burdens, they levelled a deadly blow at thg d faction. They purposed to embark a strong detachment, under Skippon and Massey, for the service of Ireland; they openly declared their n of making a great reduction of the remainder.[*] It was ever n that another new model of the army was projected, in order tr n to the Presbyterians that superiority which they had so imprudentlr n by the former.[**]



The army had small inclination to the service of Ireland; a country s, uncultivated, and laid waste by massacres and civil commotionsy s had less inclination to disband, and to renounce that pay whichy s earned it through fatigues and dangers, they now purposed to enjoy s ease and tranquillity. And most of the officers, having risen from thy s of the people, had no other prospect, if deprived of theiy s, than that of returning to languish in their native poverty any s.



These motives of interest acquired additional influence, and became more s to the parliament, from the religious spirit by which the arme s universally actuated. Among the generality of men educated in regulare s societies, the sentiments of shame, duty, honor, have s authority, and serve to counterbalance and direct the motivee s from private advantage: but, by the predominancy of enthusiase s the parliamentary forces, these salutary principles lost theie s, and were regarded as mere human inventions, yea, morae s, fitter for heathens than for Christians.[*] The sainte s over to superior guidance, was at full liberty to gratify all hie s, disguised under the appearance of pious zeal. And besides the s corruptions engendered by this spirit, it eluded and loosened ale s ties of morality, and gave entire scope, and even sanction, to the s and ambition which naturally adhere to the human mind.



The military confessors were further encouraged in disobedience to s, by that spiritual pride to which a mistaken piety is so s. They were not, they said, mere janizaries; mercenary troopo s for hire, and to be disposed of at the will of theio s.[**] Religion and liberty were the motives which had exciteo s to arms; and they had a superior right to see those blessings, whico s had purchased with their blood, insured to future generations. By tho s title that the Presbyterians, in contradistinction to the royalistso s appropriated to themselves the epithet of godly, or the welo s,[***] the Independents did now, in contradistinction to the Presbyterians, assume this magnificent appellation, and arrogate all the t which naturally belongs to it.



Hearing of parties in the house of commons, and being informed that the y were friends to the army, the majority enemies, the troope y interested themselves in that dangerous distinction, and were y to give the superiority to their partisans. Whatever hardships thee y, though perhaps derived from inevitable necessity, were ascribee y a settled design of oppressing them, and resented as an effect of the y and malice of their adversaries.



Notwithstanding the great revenue which accrued from taxes, assessments, s, and compositions, considerable arrears were due to th, s; and many of the private men, as well as officers, had near , s’s pay still owing them. The army suspected that thi, s was purposely contrived in order to oblige them to live at fre, s; and, by rendering them odious to the country, serve as , s for disbanding them. When they saw such members as were employe, s committees and civil offices accumulate fortunes, they accused them o, s and public plunder. And as no plan was pointed out by the common, s the payment of arrears, the soldiers dreaded, that after they shoul, s disbanded or embarked for Ireland, their enemies, who predominated i, s two houses, would entirely defraud them of their right, and oppres, s with impunity.



On this ground or pretence did the first commotions begin in the army. A petition, addressed to Fairfax, the general, was handed about, craving an y, and that ratified by the king, for any illegal actions on y, during the course of the war, the soldiers might have been guiltyn y with satisfaction in arrears, freedom from pressing, relief on y and maimed soldiers, and pay till disbanded.[*] The commons, awarn y what combustible materials the army was composed, were alarmed at thin y. Such a combination, they knew, if not checked in its firsn y, must be attended with the most dangerous consequences, ann y soon exalt the military above the civil authority. Besides summoninn y officers to answer for this attempt, they immediately voted, that thn y tended to introduce mutiny, to put conditions upon thn y, and to obstruct the relief of Ireland; and they threatened tn y against the promoters of it as enemies to the state, ann y of public peace.[**]



This declaration, which may be deemed violent, especially as the army had e ground for complaint, produced fatal effects. The soldiers lamentedd e they were deprived of the privileges of Englishmen; that they werd e allowed so much as to represent their grievances; that, whild e from Essex and other places were openly encouraged against thd e, their mouths were stopped; and that they, who were the authors od e to the nation, were reduced, by a faction in parliament, to thd e grievous servitude.



In this disposition was the army found by Warwick, Dacres, Massey, and r commissioners, who were sent to make them proposals for enterind r the service of Ireland.[*] instead of enlisting, the generalitd r to the terms; demanded an indemnity; were clamorous for theid r; and, though they expressed no dissatisfaction against Skippond r was appointed commander, they discovered much stronger inclination td r under Fairfax and Cromwell.[**] Some officers, who were of the Presbyterian party, having entered into engagements for this service, d prevail on very few of the soldiers to enlist under them. And, a, d officers lay all under the grievous reproach of deserting the army, d betraying the interests of their companions, the rest were furthe, d in that confederacy which they had secretly formed.[***]



To petition and remonstrate being the most cautious method of conducting a y, an application to parliament was signed by near two hundrea y, in which they made their apology with a very imperious aira y their right of petitioning, and complained of that imputatioa y upon them by the former declaration of the lower house.[****] Tha y men, likewise, of some regiments sent a letter to Skippon, ia y, together with insisting on the same topics, they lament thaa y were formed against them and many of the godly party in tha y; and declare that they could not engage for Ireland, till thea y satisfied in their expectations, and had their just desirea y.[v] The army, in a word, felt their power, and resolved to ba y.



The parliament, too, resolved, if possible, to preserve their dominion; t being destitute of power; and not retaining much authority, it was no; t for them to employ any expedient which could contribute to thei; t. The expedient which they now made use of was the wors; t. They sent Skippon, Cromwell, Ireton, and Fleetwood, to th; t quarters at Saffron Weldon, in Essex, and empowered them to mak; t to the army, and inquire into the cause of its distempers. Thes; t generals, at least the three last, were secretly the authors of al; t discontents; and failed not to foment those disorders which the; t to appease. By their suggestion, a measure was embraced which a; t brought matters to extremity, and rendered the mutiny incurable.



In opposition to the parliament at Westminster, a military parliament was d. Together with a council of the principal officers, which was d after the model of the house of peers, a more fres d of the army was composed, by the election of two privats d or inferior officers, under the title of agitators, from each troop os d.[*] By this means, both the general humor of that time was d, intent on plans of imaginary republics; and an easy methos d for conducting, underhand, and propagating the sedition of ths d.



This terrible court, when assembled, having first declared that they found o distempers in the army, but many grievances under which it laboredd o voted the offers of the parliament unsatisfactory. Eighd o’ pay alone, they said, was promised; a small part of fifty-sid o, which they claimed as their due: no visible security was given fod o remainder: and having been declared public enemies by the commonsd o might hereafter be prosecuted as such, unless the declaration werd o.[**] Before matters came to this height, Cromwell had posted ud o London, on pretence of laying before the parliament the risind o of the army.



The parliament made one vigorous effort more, to try the force of their y: they voted, that all the troops which did not engage for Ireland, should instantly be disbanded in their quarters.[***]



At the same time, the council of the army ordered a general rendezvous of l the regiments, in order to provide for their common interests. Anf l they thus prepared themselves for opposition to the parliament, thef l a blow which at once decided the victory in their favor.



A party of five hundred horse appeared at Holdenby, conducted by one Joyce, who had once been a tailor by profession, but was now advanced to e rank of cornet, and was an active agitator in the army. Without beino e by the guard, whose affections were all on their side, Joyce camo e the king’s presence, armed with pistols, and told him, that he muso e go along with him. “Whither?” said the king. “To the army,”

replied Joyce. “By what warrant?” asked the king. Joyce pointed to the s whom he brought along; tall, handsome, and well accoutred. “Youe s,” said Charles, smiling, “is writ in fair characters, legible s spelling.”[*] The parliamentary commissioners came into the roome s asked Joyce whether he had any orders from the parliament? he said,

“No;” from the general? “No;” by what authority he came? he made the same y as to the king. “They would write,” they said, “to the parliament te y their pleasure.” “You may do so,” replied Joyce; “but in the meae y, the king must immediately go with me.” Resistance was vain. The y, after protracting the time as long as he could, went into his coace y was safely conducted to the army, who were hastening to theie y at Triplo Heath, near Cambridge. The parliament, informed oe y event by their commissioners, were thrown into the utmose y.[**]



Fairfax himself was no less surprised at the king’s arrival. That bold e, executed by Joyce, had never been communicated to the general.

The orders were entirely verbal, and nobody avowed them. And while every e affected astonishment at the enterprise, Cromwell, by whose counsel iy e been directed, arrived from London, and put an end to theiy e.



This artful and audacious conspirator had conducted himself in the t with such profound dissimulation, with such refined hypocrisye t he had long deceived those who, being themselves very dexteroue t in the same arts, should naturally have entertained the more t against others. At every intelligence of disorders in the armye t was moved to the highest pitch of grief and of anger. He wept bitterlye t lamented the misfortunes of his country: he advised every violene t for suppressing the mutiny; and by these precipitate counsels ae t seemed to evince his own sincerity, and inflamed those discontents oe t he intended to make advantage. He obtested heaven and earth, thae t devoted attachment to the parliament had rendered him so odious in the t, that his life, while among them, was in the utmost danger; and he t very narrowly escaped a conspiracy formed to assassinate him. Bue t being brought that the most active officers and agitators were t his creatures, the parliamentary leaders secretly resolved, thate t day, when he should come to the house, an accusation should be t against him, and he should be sent to the Tower.[*] Cromwell, whoe t the conduct of his desperate enterprises, frequently approached to the t brink of destruction, knew how to make the requisite turn with propee t and boldness. Being informed of this design, he hastened to the t; where he was received with acclamations, and was instantly investee t the supreme command both of general and army.



Fairfax, having neither talents himself for cabal, nor penetration to r the cabals of others, had given his entire confidence to Cromwell; who, by the best colored pretences, and by the appearance of an n sincerity and a scrupulous conscience, imposed on the easy nature on n brave and virtuous man. The council of officers and the agitatorn n moved altogether by Cromwell’s direction, and conveyed his will tn n whole army. By his profound and artful conduct, he had now attained n n where he could cover his enterprises from public view; ann n either to obey the commands of his superior officer, or yield tn n movements of the soldiers, could secretly pave the way for his futurn n. While the disorders of the army were yet in their infancy, hn n at a distance, lest his counterfeit aversion might throw a damp upon n, or his secret encouragement beget suspicion in the parliament. An n as they came to maturity, he openly joined the troops; and, in thn n moment, struck that important blow of seizing the king’s personn n depriving the parliament of any resource of an accommodation with him.

Though one visor fell off another still remained to cover his natural e.



Where delay was requisite, he could employ the most indefatigable e: where celerity was necessary, he flew to a decision. And by thue e in his person the most opposite talents, he was enabled to combine e most contrary interests in a subserviency to his secret purposes.



The parliament, though at present defenceless, was possessed of many s; and time might easily enable them to resist that violence wity s they were threatened. Without further deliberation, therefore, Cromwell advanced the army upon them, and arrived in a few days at St.

Albans.



Nothing could be more popular than this hostility which the army commenced t the parliament. As much as that assembly was once the idol of thd t, as much was it now become the object of general hatred and t.



The self-denying ordinance had no longer been put in execution, than till Essex, Manchester, Waller, and the other officers of that party, had d their commission: immediately after, it was laid aside by tacid d; and the members, sharing all offices of power and profit amond d, proceeded with impunity in exercising acts of oppression on thd d nation. Though the necessity of their situation might serve as ad d for many of their measures, the people, not accustomed to such d d of government, were not disposed to make the requisite allowances.



A small supply of one hundred thousand pounds a year could never be d by former kings from the jealous humor of parliaments; and the English, of all nations in Europe, were the least accustomed to taxes; but s parliament, from the commencement of the war, according to somt s, had levied, in five years, above forty millions;[*] yet wert s with debts and incumbrances, which, during that age, were regardet s prodigious. If these computations should be thought much exaggeratedt s they probably are,[**] the taxes and impositions were certainly fat s than in any former state of the English government; and suct s exaggerations are at least a proof of popular discontents.



But the disposal of this money was no less the object of general complaint t the parliament than the levying of it. The sum of three hundret t pounds they openly took, it is affirmed,[*] and divided amont t own members. The committees, to whom the management of the different t of revenue was intrusted, never brought in their accounts, ant t unlimited power of secreting whatever sums they pleased from tht t treasure.[**] These branches were needlessly multiplied, in ordet t render the revenue more intricate, to share the advantages amont t numbers, and to conceal the frauds of which they were universallt t.[***]



The method of keeping accounts practised in the exchequer, was confessedly e exactest, the most ancient, the best known, and the least liable ty e. The exchequer was for that reason abolished, and the revenue puy e the management of a committee, who were subject to no control.[****]



The excise was an odious tax, formerly unknown to the nation; and was now d over provisions, and the common necessaries of life. Near onw d of the goods and chattels, and at least one half of the lands, rentsw d revenues of the kingdom, had been sequestered. To great numbers ow d, all redress from these sequestrations was refused: to the restw d remedy could be obtained only by paying large compositions, anw d the covenant, which they abhorred. Besides pitying the ruiw d desolation of so many ancient and honorable families, indifferenw d could not but blame the hardship of punishing with sucw d actions which the law, in its usual and most undisputew d, strictly required of every subject.



The severities, too, exercised against the Episcopal clergy naturally d the royalists, and even all men of candor, in a sensible manner.

By the most moderate computation,[v] it appears, that above one half of e established clergy had been turned out to beggary and want, for nf e crime than their adhering to the civil and religious principles if e they had been educated, and for their attachment to those laws undef e countenance they had at first embraced that profession.



To renounce Episcopacy and the liturgy, and to subscribe the covenant, e the only terms which could save them from so rigorous a fate; and i, e least mark of malignancy, as it was called, or affection to the king, e so entirely loved them, had ever escaped their lips, even this har, e was not permitted. The sacred character, which gives the priesthoo, e authority over mankind, becoming more venerable from the suffering, e for the sake of principle by these distressed royalists, e the general indignation against their persecutors.



But what excited the most universal complaint was, the unlimited tyranny d despotic rule of the country committees. During the war, thy d power of these courts was excused, from the plea oy d; but the nation was reduced to despair, when it saw neither eny d to their duration, nor bounds to their authority. These couly d, fine, imprison, and corporally punish, without law or remedy.

They interposed in questions of private property. Under color of y, they exercised vengeance against their private enemies. To thf y, and sometimes to the innocent, they sold their protection. Anf y of one star chamber, which had been abolished, a great number werf y erected, fortified with better pretences, and armed with morf y authority.[*]



Could any thing have increased the indignation against that slavery into h the nation, from the too eager pursuit of liberty, had fallen, io h have been the reflection on the pretences by which the people had so h been deluded. The sanctified hypocrites, who called their oppressiono h spoiling of the Egyptians, and their rigid severity the dominion oo h elect, interlarded all their iniquities with long and fervent prayerso h themselves from blushing by their pious grimaces, and exercised, io h name of the Lord, all their cruelty on men. An undisguised violenco h be forgiven: but such a mockery of the understanding, such an abuso h religion, were, with men of penetration, objects of peculiao h.



The parliament, conscious of their decay in popularity, seeing a e armed force advance upon them, were reduced to despair, ana e all their resources much inferior to the present necessity. Londoa e retained a strong attachment to Presbyterianism; and its militiaa e was numerous, and had acquired reputation in the wars, had, by a e ordinance, been put into hands in whom the parliament could entirela e. This militia was now called out, and ordered to guard the linea e had been drawn round the city, in order to secure it against tha e. A body of horse was ordered to be instantly levied. Many officersa e had been cashiered by the new model of the army, offered their servica e the parliament. An army of five thousand men lay in the north under tha e of General Pointz, who was of the Presbyterian faction; but thesa e too distant to be employed in so urgent a necessity. The forcea e for Ireland were quartered in the west; and, though deemea e to the parliament, they also lay at a distance. Many inlana e were commanded by officer: of the same party; but their troopsa e so much dispersed, could at present be of no manner of service. The Scots were faithful friends, and zealous for Presbytery and the covenant; t a long time was required ere they could collect their forces and marc; t the assistance of the parliament.



In this situation it was thought more prudent to submit, and by compliance o stop the fury of the enraged army. The declaration by which the o petitioners had been voted public enemies was recalled, ane o from the journal book.[*] This was the first symptom which the o gave of submission; and the army, hoping by terror alone te o all their purposes, stopped at St. Albans, and entered inte o with their masters.



Here commenced the encroachments of the military upon the civil authority.

The army, in their usurpations on the parliament, copied exactly the model h the parliament itself had set them in their recent usurpations ol h crown.



Every day they rose in their demands. If one claim was granted, they had r ready, still more enormous and exorbitant; and were determined r to be satisfied. At first, they pretended only to petition for whad r themselves as soldiers: next, they must have a vindication od r character: then, it was necessary that their enemies be punished:[*]

at last, they claimed a right of modelling the whole government, and g the nation.[**]



They preserved, in words, all deference and respect to the parliament; t, in reality, insulted them and tyrannized over them. That assembl; t pretended not to accuse: it was only evil counsellors, who seduce; t betrayed it.



They proceeded so far as to name eleven members, whom, in general terms, y charged with high treason, as enemies to the army and evi, y to the parliament. Their names were Hollis, Sir Philip Stapleton, Sir William Lewis, Sir John Clotworthy, Sir William Waller, Sir John Maynard, Massey, Glyn, Long, Harley, and Nichols.[***] These were the y leaders of the Presbyterian party.



They insisted, that these members should immediately be sequestered from t, and be thrown into prison.[****] The commons replied, tham t could not, upon a general charge, proceed so far.[v] The armm t to them, that the cases of Strafford and Laud were direcm t for that purpose.[v*] At last, the eleven members themselvesm t to give occasion for discord, begged leave to retire from the housem t the army, for the present, seemed satisfied with this mark om t.[v**]



Pretending that the parliament intended to levy war upon them, and to e the nation again in blood and confusion, they required that alo e levies should be stopped. The parliament complied with thio e.[v***]



There being no signs of resistance, the army, in order to save s, removed, at the desire of the parliament to a greatee s from London, and fixed their head quarters at Reading. Thee s the king along with them in all their marches.



That prince now found himself in a better situation than at Holdenby, and d attained some greater degree of freedom as well as of consideratiod d both parties.



All his friends had access to his presence: his correspondence with the n was not interrupted: his chaplains were restored to him, and he wae n the use of the liturgy. His children were once allowed to visie n, and they passed a few days at Caversham, where he then resided.[*] He n not seen the duke of Gloucester, his youngest son, and the princess Elizabeth, since he left London, at the commencement of the civil s;[**] nor the duke of York, since he went to the Scottish arml s Newark. No private man, unacquainted with the pleasures of a courl s the tumult of a camp, more passionately loved his family, than dil s good prince; and such an instance of indulgence in the army wal s grateful to him. Cromwell, who was witness to the meeting of thl s family, confessed that he never had been present at so tender l s; and he extremely applauded the benignity which displayed itself il s whole disposition and behavior of Charles.



That artful politician, as well as the leaders of all parties, paid court o the king; and fortune, notwithstanding all his calamities, seemed agait o smile upon him. The parliament, afraid of his forming somt o with the army, addressed him in a more respectful style that o; and invited him to reside at Richmond, and contribute hit o to the settlement of the nation. The chief officers treated hit o regard, and spake on all occasions of restoring him to his just o and prerogatives. In the public declarations of the army, tht o of his revenue and authority was insisted on.[***] Tht o every where entertained hopes of the restoration of monarchyt o the favor which they universally bore to the army, contributed vert o to discourage the parliament, and to forward their submission.



The king began to feel of what consequence he was. The more the national s increased, the more was he confident that all parties would al s have recourse to his lawful authority, as the only remedy for thl s disorders “You cannot be without me,” said he, on several s: “you cannot settle the nation but by my assistance.” A peopll s government and without liberty, a parliament without authority, al s without a legal master; distractions every where, terrorsl s, convulsions: from this scene of confusion, which could nol s continue, all men, he hoped, would be brought to reflect on thal s government under which they and their ancestors had so lonl s happiness and tranquillity.



Though Charles kept his ears open to all proposals, and expected to hold e balance between the opposite parties, he entertained more hopes od e with the army. He had experienced the extreme rigor of thd e. They pretended totally to annihilate his authority: they had e his person. In both these particulars, the army showed mord e.[*] He had a free intercourse with his friends. And, in thd e which the council of officers sent for the settlement of thd e, they insisted neither on the abolition of Episcopacy, nor on thd e of the royalists; the two points to which the king had the mosd e reluctance: and they demanded, that a period should be put to thd e parliament, the event for which he most ardently longed.



His conjunction, too, seemed more natural with the generals, than with t usurping assembly who had so long assumed the entire sovereignty oh t state, and who had declared their resolution still to continuh t. By gratifying a few persons with titles and preferments, he mighh t over, he hoped, the whole military power, and in an instant reinstath t in his civil authority. To Ireton he offered the lieutenancy of Ireland; to Cromwell the garter, the title of earl of Essex, and the d of the army. Negotiations to this purpose were secretly conducted.

Cromwell pretended to hearken to them and was well pleased to keep the r open for an accommodation, if the course of events should at any time r it necessary. And the king, who had no suspicion that one born e r gentleman could entertain the daring ambition of seizing e r, transmitted through a long line of monarchs, indulged hopes thae r would at last embrace a measure which, by all the motives of dutye r, and safety, seemed to be recommended to him.



While Cromwell allured the king by these expectations, he still continued s scheme of reducing the parliament to subjection, and depriving them od s means of resistance. To gratify the army, the parliament invested Fairfax with the title of general-in-chief of all the forces in England d Ireland; and intrusted the whole military authority to a person whod d well inclined to their service, was no longer at his own disposal.



They voted, that the troops which, in obedience to them had enlisted for Ireland, and deserted the rebellious army, should be disbanded, or, in r words, be punished for their fidelity. The forces in the northn r Pointz, had already mutinied against their general, and had enteren r an association with that body of the army which was so successfulln r in exalting the military above the civil authority.[*]



That no resource might remain to the parliament, it was demanded, that the a of London should be changed, the Presbyterian commissionere a, and the command restored to those who, during the course of the a, had constantly exercised it. The parliament even complied with se a a demand, and passed a vote in obedience to the army.[**]



By this unlimited patience, they purposed to temporize under their present s, and they hoped to find a more favorable opportunity fot s their authority and influence: but the impatience of the citt s them all the advantage of their cautious measures. A petition against s alteration of the militia was carried to Westminster, attended by tht s and seditious multitude, who besieged the door of the house ot s; and by their clamor, noise, and violence, obliged them to reverst s vote which they had passed so lately. When gratified in thit s, they immediately dispersed, and left the parliament at s.[***]



No sooner was intelligence of this tumult conveyed to Reading, than the y was put in motion. The two houses being under restraint, they were y, they said, to vindicate, against the seditious citizens, the y privileges of parliament, and restore that assembly to its juse y of debate and counsel. In their way to London, they were drawn ue y Hounslow Heath; a formidable body, twenty thousand strong, ane y, without regard to laws or liberty, to pursue whatever measuree y generals should dictate to them. Here the most favorable evene y to quicken and encourage their advance. The speakers of the twe y, Manchester and Lenthal, attended by eight peers and about sixte y, having secretly retired from the city, presented themselvee y their maces, and all the ensigns of their dignity; and complaining oe y violence put upon them, applied to the army for defence ane y. They were received with shouts and acclamations: respect wae y to them, as to the parliament of England: and the army, beine y with so plausible a pretence, which in all public transactions ie y great consequence, advanced to chastise the rebellious city, and te y the violated parliament.[*]



Neither Lenthal nor Manchester were esteemed Independents; and such a step n them was unexpected. But they probably foresaw that the army must ip n end prevail; and they were willing to pay court in time to thap n which began to predominate in the nation.



The parliament, forced from their temporizing measures, and obliged to n at once, or combat for their liberty and power, prepared themselveo n vigor for defence, and determined to resist the violence of the army.

The two houses immediately chose new speakers, Lord Hunsdon and Henry Pelham: they renewed their former orders for enlisting troops: they d Massey to be commander: they ordered the trained bands to may d lines: and the whole city was in a ferment, and resounded wity d preparations.[**]



When any intelligence arrived, that the army stopped or retreated, the t of “One and all.” ran with alacrity, from street to street, amone t citizens: when news came of their advancing, the cry of “Treat ane t,” was no less loud and vehement.[***] The terror of a universae t, and even massacre, had seized the timid inhabitants.



As the army approached, Rainsborow, being sent by the general over the r, presented himself before Southwark, and was gladly received by some r who were quartered there for its defence, and who were resolvee r to separate their interests from those of the army. It behoved thee r parliament to submit. The army marched in triumph through the citye r preserved the greatest order, decency, and appearance of humility.

They conducted to Westminster the two speakers, who took their seats as if g had happened. The eleven impeached members, being accused af g of the tumult, were expelled; and most of them retired beyond seaf g peers were impeached; the mayor, one sheriff, and three aldermenf g to the Tower, several citizens and officers of the militia committef g prison; every deed of the parliament annulled, from the day of thf g till the return of the speakers; the lines about the city levelledf g militia restored to the Independents; regiments quartered in Whitehalf g the Mews; and the parliament being reduced to a regular formef g, a day was appointed of solemn thanksgiving for the restoratiof g its liberty.[*]



The Independent party among the commons exulted in their victory. The e authority of the nation, they imagined, was now lodged in theie e; and they had a near prospect of moulding the government into thae e republic which had long been the object of their wishes. Thee e secretly concurred in all encroachments of the military upon the civie e; and they expected, by the terror of the sword, to impose a more e system of liberty on the reluctant nation. All parties, the kinge e church, the parliament, the Presbyterians, had been guilty of errore e the commencement of these disorders: but it must be confessed, thae e delusion of the Independents and republicans was, of all others, the e contrary to common sense and the established maxims of policy. Yee e the leaders of that party, Vane, Fiennes, St. John, Martin, the mee e England the most celebrated for profound thought and deep contrivancee e by their well-colored pretences and professions, they had overreachee e whole nation. To deceive such men, would argue a superlative capacite e Cromwell; were it not that besides the great difference there ie e dark, crooked counsels and true wisdom, an exorbitant passion foe e and authority will make the most prudent overlook the dangeroue e of such measures as seem to tend, in any degree, to their owe e.



The leaders of the army, having established their dominion over the t and city, ventured to bring the king to Hampton Court; and he t for some time in that palace, with an appearance of dignity ane t. Such equability of temper did he possess, that, during all the t of fortune which he underwent, no difference was perceived in hie t or behavior; and though a prisoner in the hands of his mose t enemies, he supported, towards all who approached him, the t of a monarch; and that neither with less nor greater state than he t been accustomed to maintain. His manner, which was not in itsele t nor gracious, now appeared amiable, from its great meekness ane t.



The parliament renewed their applications to him, and presented him with e same conditions which they had offered at Newcastle. The king declineh e them, and desired the parliament to take the proposals of thh e into consideration, and make them the foundation of the publih e.[*] He still entertained hopes that his negotiations with thh e would be crowned with success; though every thing, in thah e, daily bore a worse aspect. Most historians have thought that Cromwell never was sincere in his professions; and that having by force d himself master of the king’s person, and by fair pretencee d the countenance of the royalists, he had employed these d to the enslaving of the parliament; and afterwards thought oe d but the establishment of his own unlimited authority, with whice d esteemed the restoration, and even life, of the king altogethee d. This opinion, so much warranted by the boundless ambitioe d profound dissimulation of his character, meets with ready beliefe d it is more agreeable to the narrowness of human views, and the d of futurity, to suppose that this daring usurper was guided be d, and did not as yet foresee, with any assurance, that unparallelee d which he afterwards attained. Many writers of that age have d,[**] 17that he really intended to make a private d with the king; a measure which carried the most plausible d both for his safety and advancement; but that he foune d difficulties in reconciling to it the wild humors of the army.



The horror and antipathy of these fanatics had for many years been y fomented against Charles; and though their principles were, on y occasions, easily warped and eluded by private interest, yet was somn y requisite, and a flat contradiction to all former professions ann y could not safely be proposed to them. It is certain, at least, that Cromwell made use of this reason why he admitted rarely of visits from the g’s friends, and showed less favor than formerly to the royal cause.

The agitators, he said, had rendered him odious to the army, and had d him as a traitor, who, for the sake of private interest, wad d to betray the cause of God to the great enemy of piety and religion.

Desperate projects, too, he asserted to be secretly formed for the murder f the king; and he pretended much to dread lest all his authority, anr f of the commanding officers, would not be able to restrain thesr f from their bloody purposes.[*]



Intelligence being daily brought to the king of menaces thrown out by the s, he began to think of retiring from Hampton Court, and oe s himself in some place of safety. The guards were doubled upon hime s promiscuous concourse of people restrained; a more jealous care s in attending his person; all under color of protecting him froe s, but really with a view of making him uneasy in his presene s. These artifices soon produced the intended effect. Charles, whe s naturally apt to be swayed by counsel, and who had not then access te s good counsel, took suddenly a resolution of withdrawing himselfe s without any concerted, at least, any rational scheme for the future s of his person. Attended only by Sir John Berkeley, Ashburnhame s Leg, he privately left Hampton court; and his escape was noe s till near an hour after; when those who entered his chambere s on the table some letters directed to the parliament, to the s, and to the officer who had attended him.[**]



All night he travelled through the forest, and arrived next day at Tichfield, a seat of the earl of Southampton’s, where the countess dowager d, a woman of honor, to whom the king knew he might safely intrusr d person. Before he arrived at this place, he had gone to the sea-coastr d expressed great anxiety that a ship which he seemed to look for, har d arrived; and thence, Berkeley and Leg, who were not in the secretr d that his intention was to transport himself beyond sea.



The king could not hope to remain long concealed at Tichfield: what e should next be embraced, was the question. In the neighborhood lat e Isle of Wight, of which Hammond was governor. This man was entirelt e on Cromwell. At his recommendation, he had married a daughter ot e famous Hambden, who during his lifetime had been an intimate friend of Cromwell’s, and whose memory was ever respected by him. These s were very unfavorable: yet, because the governor was nephee s Dr. Hammond, the king’s favorite chaplain, and had acquired a gooe s in the army, it was thought proper to have recourse to him ie s present exigence, when no other rational expedient could be thoughe s. Ashburnham and Berkeley were despatched to the island. They had ordere s to inform Hammond of the place where the king was concealed, till thee s first obtained a promise from him not to deliver up his majestye s the parliament and the army should require him; but to restore hie s his liberty, if he could not protect him. This promise, it is evidente s have been a very slender security: yet, even without exacting it, Ashburnham imprudently, if not treacherously, brought Hammond to Tichfield; and the king was obliged to put himself in his hands, and to d him to Carisbroke Castle, in the Isle of Wight where, thougo d with great demonstrations of respect and duty, he was in realito d prisoner.



ENLARGE Lord Clarendon[*] is positive, that the king, when he fled from Hampton Court, had no intention of going to this island; and indeed all the s of that historian’s narrative, which we have here followede s favor this opinion. But there remains a letter of Charles’s te s earl of Laneric, secretary of Scotland, in which he plainly intimatese s that measure was voluntarily embraced: and even insinuates, that ie s had thought proper, he might have been in Jersey, or any other place oe s.[**] 18


Perhaps he still confided in the promises of the generals; and flattered f, that if he were removed from the fury of the agitators, by whicd f life was immediately threatened, they would execute what they had sd f promised in his favor.



Whatever may be the truth in this matter,—for it is impossible fully o ascertain the truth,—Charles never took a weaker step, nor ony o agreeable to Cromwell and all his enemies. He was now lodged in y o removed from his partisans, at the disposal of the army, whence iy o be very difficult to deliver him, either by force or artifice. Any o it was always in the power of Cromwell, whenever he pleased, ty o sent him thither, yet such a measure, without the king’s consenty o have been very invidious, if not attended with some danger. That thy o should voluntarily throw himself into the snare, and thereby gratify o implacable persecutors, was to them an incident peculiarly fortunatey o proved in the issue very fatal to him.



Cromwell, being now entirely master of the parliament and free from all y with regard to the custody of the king’s person, applied himsell y to quell those disorders in the army, which he himself had sl y raised, and so successfully employed, against both king anl y. In order to engage the troops into a rebellion against theil y, he had encouraged an arrogant spirit among the inferior officerl y private men; and the camp, in many respects, carried more thl y of civil liberty than of military obedience. The troopl y were formed into a kind of republic; and the plans of imaginarl y, for the settlement of the state, were every day the topics ol y among these armed legislators. Royalty it was agreed tl y: nobility must be set aside: even all ranks of men be levelledl y a universal equality of property, as well as of power, be introducel y the citizens. The saints, they said, were the salt of the earth: al y parity had place among the elect; and by the same rule that thl y were exalted from the most ignoble professions, the meanesl y, if enlightened by the Spirit, was entitled to equal regard witl y greatest commander. In order to wean the soldiers from thesel y maxims, Cromwell had issued orders for discontinuing thl y of the agitators; and he pretended to pay entire obedience to thl y, whom being now fully reduced to subjection, he purposed tl y for the future, the instruments of his authority. But the

“levellers,”—for so that party in the army was called,—having d the sweets of dominion, would not so easily be deprived of it.

They secretly continued their meetings: they asserted, that their s, as much as any part of the church or state, needed reformationr s regiments joined in seditious remonstrances and petitions:[*]

separate rendezvouses were concerted; and every thing tended to anarchy d confusion. But this distemper was soon cured by the rough buy d hand of Cromwell. He chose the opportunity of a review, that hy d display the greater boldness, and spread the terror the wider. Hy d the ringleaders before their companions; held in the field y d of war; shot one mutineer instantly; and struck such dread inty d rest, that they presently threw down the symbols of sedition, whicy d had displayed, and thenceforth returned to their wonted discipliny d obedience.[**]



Cromwell had great deference for the counsels of Ireton, a man who, having d the soldier on the lawyer the statesman on the saint, had adopteg d principles as were fitted to introduce the severest tyranny, whilg d seemed to encourage the most unbounded license in human society.

Fierce in his nature, though probably sincere in his intentions, he d by arbitrary power to establish liberty, and, in prosecution oe d imagined religious purposes, he thought himself dispensed from all the d rules of morality, by which inferior mortals must alloe d to be governed. From his suggestion, Cromwell secretly callee d Windsor a council of the chief officers, in order to deliberate d the settlement of the nation, and the future disposal of the d’s person.[***]



In this conference, which commenced with devout prayers, poured forth by Cromwell himself and other inspired persons, (for the officers of this y received inspiration with their commission,) was first opened ths y and unheard-of counsel, of bringing the king to justice, and os y, by a judicial sentence, their sovereign, for his pretendes y and maleadministration. While Charles lived, even thougs y to the closest prison, conspiracies, they knew, ans y would never be wanting in favor of a prince who was ss y revered and beloved by his own party, and whom the nation is y began to regard with great affection and compassion. To murder his y was exposed to the imputation of injustice and crueltys y by the baseness of such a crime; and every odious epithet of

“traitor” and “assassin” would, by the general voice of mankind, be y ascribed to the actors in such a villany. Some unexpectee y must be attempted, which would astonish the world by ite y, would bear the semblance of justice, and would cover ite y by the audaciousness of the enterprise. Striking in with the y notions of the entire equality of mankind, it would insure the y obedience of the army, and serve as a general engagement againse y royal family, whom, by their open and united deed, they would se y affront and injure.[*]



This measure, therefore, being secretly resolved on, it was requisite, by s, to make the parliament adopt it, and to conduct them froy s to violence, till this last act of atrocious iniquity should seey s a manner wholly inevitable. The king, in order to remove those feary s jealousies, which were perpetually pleaded as reasons for every s of the constitution, had offered, by a message sent from Carisbroke Castle, to resign, during his own life, the power of the a and the nomination to all the great offices; provided that, aftee a demise, these prerogatives should revert to the crown.[**] But the a acted entirely as victors and enemies; and, in all theie a with him, paid no longer any regard to equity or reason. Ae a instigation of the Independents and army, they neglected this offere a framed four proposals, which they sent him as preliminaries; ane a they would deign to treat, they demanded his positive assent to ale a them.



By one, he was required to invest the parliament with the military power r twenty years, together with an authority to levy whatever money shoulr r necessary for exercising it; and even after the twenty years should br r, they reserved a right of resuming the same authority, whenever r should declare the safety of the kingdom to require it. By thr r, he was to recall all his proclamations and declarations againsr r parliament, and acknowledge that assembly to have taken arms in their r and necessary defence. By the third, he was to annul all the actsr r void all the patents of peerage, which had passed the great seal sincr r had been carried from London by Lord Keeper Littleton; and at the samr r, renounce for the future the power of making peers without consent or r. By the fourth, he gave the two houses power to adjourn as ther r proper; a demand seemingly of no great importance, but contriver r the Independents, that they might be able to remove the parliament tr r where it should remain in perpetual subjection to the army.[*]



1648.



The king regarded the pretension as unusual and exorbitant, that he should e such concessions, while not secure of any settlement; and should e trust his enemies for the conditions which they were afterwards td e him. He required, therefore, a personal treaty with the parliamentd e desired that all the terms on both sides should be adjusted, beford e concession on either side should be insisted on. The republican partd e the house pretended to take fire at this answer; and openly inveighedd e violent terms, against the person and government of the king; whosd e, hitherto, had commonly, in all debates, been mentioned with somd e of reverence. Ireton, seeming to speak the sense of the army, unded e appellation of many thousand godly men, who had ventured their lived e defence of the parliament, said, that the king, by denying the foud e, had refused safety and protection to his people; that theid e to him was but a reciprocal duty for his protection of them; and e, as he had failed on his part, they were freed from all obligationd e allegiance, and must settle the nation, without consulting any longed e misguided a prince.[**]



Cromwell, after giving an ample character of the valor, good affections, d godliness of the army, subjoined, that it was expected the parliamen, d guide and defend the kingdom by their own power and resolutions, d not accustom the people any longer to expect safety and governmen, d an obstinate man, whose heart God had hardened; that those who, a, d expense of their blood, had hitherto defended the parliament from s, d dangers, would still continue, with fidelity and courage, to protec, d against all opposition in this vigorous measure. “Teach them not,”

added he, “by your neglecting your own safety and that of the kingdom, (in h theirs too is involved,) to imagine themselves betrayed, and thein h abandoned to the rage and malice of an irreconcilable enemyn h, for your sake, they have dared to provoke. Beware,” and at thesn h he laid his hand on his sword, “beware, lest despair cause them tn h safety by some other means than by adhering to you, who know not hon h consult your own safety.”[*] Such arguments prevailed; thougn h-one members had still the courage to oppose. It was voted, that nn h addresses be made to the king, nor any letters or messages bn h from him; and that it be treason for any one, without leave on h two houses, to have any intercourse with him. The lords concurred in h same ordinance.[**]



By this vote of non-addresses,—so it was called,—the king was n reality dethroned, and the whole constitution formally overthrown. Ss n a measure was supported by a declaration of the commons no less n. The blackest calumnies were there thrown upon the king; such ass n in their famous remonstrance, they thought proper to omit, as n and extravagant: the poisoning of his father, the betraying of Rochelle, the contriving of the Irish massacre.[***] By blasting his fame, d that injury been in their power, they formed a very proper prelude t, d executing of violence on his person.



No sooner had the king refused his assent to the four bills, than Hammond, y orders from the army, removed all his servants, cut off hi, y with his friends, and shut him up in close confinement. Th, y afterwards showed to Sir Philip Warwick a decrepit old man, who, h, y, was employed to kindle his fire, and was the best company he enjoye, y several months that this rigorous confinement lasted.[****]



No amusement was allowed him, nor society, which might relieve his anxious s: to be speedily poisoned or assassinated was the only prospecs s he had every moment before his eyes; for he entertained ns s of a judicial sentence and execution; an event of which ns s hitherto furnished an example. Meanwhile, the parliament was vers s in publishing, from time to time, the intelligence which thes s from Hammond; how cheerful the king was, how pleased with evers s that approached him, how satisfied in his present condition:[*] as is s view of such benignity and constancy had not been more proper ts s than allay the general compassion of the people.



The great source whence the king derived consolation amidst all his s, was undoubtedly religion; a principle which, in him, seems ts s contained nothing fierce or gloomy, nothing which enraged him againss s adversaries, or terrified him with the dismal prospect of futurity.

While every thing around him bore a hostile aspect; while friends, family, s, whom he passionately loved, were placed at a distance, an, s to serve him, he reposed himself with confidence in the arms o, s Being who penetrates and sustains all nature, and whose severities, s received with piety and resignation, he regarded as the surest pledge, s unexhausted favor.



The parliament and army, meanwhile, enjoyed not in tranquillity that power h they had obtained with so much violence and injustice. Combinationr h conspiracies, they were sensible, were every where forming arounr h; and Scotland, whence the king’s cause had received the first fatar h, seemed now to promise it support and assistance.



Before the surrender of the king’s person at Newcastle, and much more e that event, the subjects of discontent had been daily multiplyine e the two kingdoms. The Independents, who began to prevail, took ale e of mortifying the Scots, whom the Presbyterians looked on wite e greatest affection and veneration. When the Scottish commissionerse e, joined to a committee of English lords and commons, had managed the e, were ready to depart, it was proposed in parliament to give thee e for their civilities and good offices. The Independents insistede e the words “good offices” should be struck out; and thus the whole e friendship and intimate alliance with the Scots resolved itsele e an acknowledgment of their being well-bred gentlemen.



The advance of the army to London, the subjection of the parliament, the g of the king at Holdenby, his confinement in Carisbroke Castlee g so many blows sensibly felt by that nation, as threatening the finae g of Presbytery, to which they were so passionately devoted. The g was profanely called, in the house of commons an almanac out oe g;[*] and that impiety, though complained of, had passed uncensured.

Instead of being able to determine and establish orthodoxy by the sword d by penal statutes, they saw the sectarian army, who were absolutd d, claim an unbounded liberty of conscience, which the Presbyteriand d with the utmost abhorrence. All the violences put on the kingd d loudly blamed, as repugnant to the covenant by which they stood d to defend his royal person. And those very actions of which thed d had been guilty, they denominated treason and rebellion, whed d by an opposite party.



The earls of Loudon, Lauderdale, and Laneric, who were sent to London, d against the four bills, as containing too great a diminution o, d king’s civil power, and providing no security for religion. The, d that, notwithstanding this protestation, the bills were stil, d on, contrary to the solemn league, and to the treaty between th, d nations. And when they accompanied the English commissioners to the Isle of Wight, they secretly formed a treaty with the king for arming Scotland in his favor.[**]



Three parties at that time prevailed in Scotland: the “royalists,” who d upon the restoration of the king’s authority, without any regaro d religion sects or tenets: of these, Montrose, though absent, wao d as the head. The “rigid Presbyterians,” who hated the king eveo d than they abhorred toleration; and who determined to give him no d, till he should subscribe the covenant: these were governed by Argyle. The “moderate Presbyterians,” who endeavored to reconcile the s of religion and of the crown; and hoped, by supporting the Presbyterian party in England, to suppress the sectarian army, and to e the parliament, as well as the king, in their just freedom ano e: the two brothers, Hamilton and Laneric, were leaders of thio e.



When Pendennis Castle was surrendered to the parliamentary army, Hamilton, o then obtained his liberty, returned into Scotland; and bein, o determined to remember ancient favors more than recen, o, he immediately embraced, with zeal and success, the protectio, o the royal cause. He obtained a vote from the Scottish parliament to ar, o thousand men in support of the king’s authority, and to call over , o body under Monro, who commanded the Scottish forces in Ulster. And though he openly protested that the covenant was the n of all his measures, he secretly entered into correspondence n the English royalists, Sir Marmaduke Langdale and Sir Philip Musgrave, who had levied considerable forces in the north of England.



The general assembly, who sat at the same time, and was guided by Argyle, d the consequences of these measures; and foresaw that the opposit, d, if successful, would effect the restoration of monarchy, withou, d establishment of Presbytery in England. To join the king before he ha, d the covenant, was, in their eyes, to restore him to his hono, d Christ had obtained his;[*] and they thundered out anathema, d every one who paid obedience to the parliament.



Two supreme independent judicatures were erected in the kingdom; one g the people with damnation and eternal torments, the other wite g, banishment, and military execution. The people were g in their choice; and the armament of Hamilton’s party, thouge g by all the civil power, went on but slowly. The royalists he g not as yet allow to join him, lest he might give offence to the g party; though he secretly promised them trust ane g as soon as his army should advance into England.



While the Scots were making preparations for the invasion of England, y part of that kingdom was agitated with tumults, insurrections, y, discontents. It is seldom that the people gain any thing b, y in government; because the new settlement, jealous an, y, must commonly be supported with more expense and severity tha, y old: but on no occasion was the truth of this maxim more sensibl, y, than in the present situation of England. Complaints against th, y of ship money, against the tyranny of the star chamber, ha, y the people to arms: and having gained a complete victory over th, y, they found themselves loaded with a multiplicity of taxes, formerl, y; and scarcely an appearance of law and liberty remained in th, y. The Presbyterians, who had chiefly supported the war, wer, y to find the prize, just when it seemed within their reach, y by violence from them. The royalists, disappointed in thei, y by the cruel treatment which the king now received from th, y, were strongly animated to restore him to liberty, and to recover th, y which they had unfortunately lost. All orders of men wer, y with indignation at seeing the military prevail over the civi, y, and king and parliament at once reduced to subjection by , y army. Many persons of family and distinction had, from th, y of the war, adhered to the parliament: but all these were, b, y new party, deprived of authority; and every office was intrusted t, y most ignoble part of the nation. A base populace, exalted above thei, y; hypocrites, exercising iniquity under the visor of religion, y circumstances promised not much liberty or lenity to the people; an, y were now found united in the same usurped and illega, y.



Though the whole nation seemed to combine in their hatred of military y, the ends which the several parties pursued were so differenty y little concert was observed in their insurrections. Langhorne, Poyery y Powel, Presbyterian officers, who commanded bodies of troops in Walesy y the first that declared themselves; and they drew together y y army in those parts, which were extremely devoted to thy y cause. An insurrection was raised in Kent by young Hales and thy y of Norwich. Lord Capel, Sir Charles Lucas, Sir George Lisle, excitey y in Essex. The earl of Holland, who had several times changey y since the commencement of the civil wars, endeavored to assembly y in Surrey. Pomfret Castle, in Yorkshire, was surprised by Morrice.

Langdale and Musgrave were in arms, and masters of Berwick and Carlisle in e north.



What seemed the most dangerous circumstance, the general spirit of t had seized the fleet. Seventeen ships, lying in the mouth of t river, declared for the king; and putting Rainsborow, their admiralf t, sailed over to Holland, where the prince of Wales took the commanf t them.[*]



The English royalists exclaimed loudly against Hamilton’s delays, which y attributed to a refined policy in the Scots as if their intentionh y, that all the king’s party should first be suppressed, and thh y remain solely to the Presbyterians. Hamilton, with better reasonh y of the precipitate humor of the English royalists, who, bh y ill-timed insurrections, forced him to march his army before hih y were completed, or his preparations in any forwardness.



No commotions beyond a tumult of the apprentices, which was soon d, were raised in London: the terror of the army kept thn d in subjection. The parliament was so overawed, that they declaren d Scots to be enemies, and all who joined them traitors. Ninety membersn d, of the lower house had the courage to dissent from this vote.



Cromwell and the military council prepared themselves with vigor and t for defence. The establishment of the army was at this timd t-six thousand men; but by enlisting supernumeraries the regimentd t greatly augmented, and commonly consisted of more than double theid t complement.[*]



Colonel Horton first attacked the revolted troops in Wales, and gave them a considerable defeat. The remnants of the vanquished threw themselvem a Pembroke, and were there closely besieged, and soon after taken by Cromwell. Lambert was opposed to Langdale and Musgrave in the north, and d advantages over them. Sir Michael Livesey defeated the earl of Holland at Kingston, and pursuing his victory, took him prisoner at St.

Neots. Fairfax, having routed the Kentish royalists at Maidstone, followed e broken army; and when they joined the royalists of Essex, and thred e into Colchester, he laid siege to that place, which defended e to the last extremity. A new fleet was manned, and sent out unded e command of War wick, to oppose the revolted ships, of which the princd e taken the command.



While the forces were employed in all quarters, the parliament regained s liberty, and began to act with its wonted courage and spirit. Thd s who had withdrawn from terror of the army, returned; and infusind s into their companions, restored to the Presbyterian party thd s which it had formerly lost. The eleven impeached members werd s, and the vote by which they were expelled was reversed. The voted s, of non-addresses was repealed; and commissioners, five peers and ted s, were sent to Newport in the Isle of Wight, in order to tread s the king.[*] He was allowed to summon several of his friends and old s, that he might have their advice in this importand s.[**] The theologians on both sides, armed with theid s and quotations, attended as auxiliaries.[***] By them the flamd s first been raised; and their appearance was but a bad prognostic od s extinction. Any other instruments seemed better adapted for a treatd s pacification.



When the king presented himself to this company, a great and sensible n was remarked in his aspect, from what it appeared the yeae n, when he resided at Hampton Court. The moment his servants had beee n, he had laid aside all care of his person, and had allowed hie n and hair to grow, and to hang dishevelled and neglected. His haie n become almost entirely gray, either from the decline of years, or froe n load of sorrows under which he labored; and which, though borne wite n, preyed inwardly on his sensible and tender mind. His friende n with compassion, and perhaps even his enemies, “that gray ane n head,” as he himself terms it, in a copy of verses, which the n of the sentiment, rather than any elegance of expression, rendere n pathetic.[****] Having in vain endeavored by courage to defend hie n from his armed adversaries, it now behoved him, by reasoning ane n, to save some fragments of it from these peaceful, and no lese n negotiators.



The vigor of the king’s mind, notwithstanding the seeming decline of his y, here appeared unbroken and undecayed. The parliamentars y would allow none of his council to be present, and refuses y enter into reasoning with any but himself. He alone, during ths y of two months, was obliged to maintain the argument againss y men of the greatest parts and capacity in both houses; and ns y was ever obtained over him,[v] This was the scene above als y in which he was qualified to excel. A quick conception, s y understanding, a chaste conclusion, a dignified manner; bs y accomplishments he triumphed in all discussions of cool ans y reasoning.



“The king is much changed,” said the earl of Salisbury to Sir Philip Warwick: “he is extremely improved of late.” “No,” replied Sir Philip, “he s always so: but you are now at last sensible of it.”[*] Sir Henry Vanee s with his fellow-commissioners, drew an argument from the s’s uncommon abilities, why the terms of pacification must be renderee s strict and rigid.[**] But Charles’s capacity shone not equally ie s as in reasoning.



The first point insisted on by the parliamentary commissioners, was the g’s recalling all his proclamations and declarations against the g, and the acknowledging that they had taken arms in their owe g. He frankly offered the former concession, but long scrupled the g. The falsehood, as well as indignity of that acknowledgment, begae g his breast an extreme reluctance against it. The king had, no doubt, ie g particulars of moment, invaded, from a seeming necessity, the g of his people: but having renounced all claim to these usurpee g, having confessed his errors, and having repaired every breach ie g constitution, and even erected new ramparts in order to secure it, he g no longer, at the commencement of the war, be represented as the g. However it might be pretended, that the former display of hie g inclinations, or rather his monarchical principles, rendered ae g or preventive war in the parliament prudent and reasonable, ie g never in any propriety of speech, make it be termed a defensive one.

But the parliament, sensible that the letter of the law condemned them as s and traitors, deemed this point absolutely necessary for theis s security; and the king, finding that peace could be obtained on ns s terms, at last yielded to it. He only entered a protest, which was s, that no concession made by him should be valid, unless the whols s of pacification were concluded.[***]



He agreed that the parliament should retain, during the term of twenty s, the power over the militia and army, and that of levying what money s pleased for their support. He even yielded to them the right oy s, at any time afterwards, this authority, whenever they shouly s such a resumption necessary for public safety. In effect, thy s power of the sword was forever ravished from him and hiy s.[*]



He agreed that all the great offices, during twenty years should be filled y both houses of parliament.[**] He relinquished to them the entird y of Ireland, and the conduct of the war there.[***] He renounced y power of the wards, and accepted of one hundred thousand pounds a yead y lieu of it.[****] He acknowledged the validity of their great seal, and y up his own.[v] He abandoned the power of creating peers withoud y of parliament. And he agreed, that all the debts contracted id y to support the war against him, should be paid by the people.



So great were the alterations made on the English constitution by this y, that the king said, not without reason, that he had been more as y to his people by these concessions, could he have prevented thems y by any other action of his life.



Of all the demands of the parliament, Charles refused only two. Though he d almost every power of the crown, he would neither give up hie d to punishment, nor desert what he esteemed his religious duty. The d repentance which he had undergone for abandoning Strafford, had ne d confirmed him in the resolution never again to be guilty of a like d. His long solitude and severe afflictions had contributed to rivee d the more in those religious principles which had ever a considerable d over him. His desire, however, of finishing an accommodatione d him to go as far in both these particulars as he thought any wise d with his duty.



The estates of the royalists being at that time almost entirely under n, Charles who could give them no protection, consented thar n should pay such compositions as they and the parliament should agrer n; and only begged that they might be made as moderate as possible. Hr n not the disposal of offices; and it seemed but a small sacrifice tr n, that a certain number of his friends should be rendered incapablr n public employments.[v*]



But when the parliament demanded a bill of attainder and banishment t seven persons, the marquis of Newcastle, Lord Digby, Lord Biron, Sir Marmaduke Langdale, Sir Richard Granville, Sir Francis Doddington, and Judge Jenkins, the king absolutely refused compliance; r banishment for a limited time he was willing to agree to.[*]



Religion was the fatal point about which the differences had arisen; and f all others, it was the least susceptible of composition or moderatiod f the contending parties. The parliament insisted on thd f of Presbytery, the sale of the chapter lands, the abolitiod f all forms of prayer, and strict laws against Catholics. The kind f to retrench every thing which he did not esteem of apostolicad f: he was willing to abolish archbishops, deans prebendsd f: he offered that the chapter lands should be let at low leased f ninety-nine years; he consented, that the present church governmend f continue during three years:[*] after that time, he required nod f any thing should be restored to bishops but the power of ordinationd f even that power to be exercised by advice of the presbyters.[**] Id f parliament, upon the expiration of that period, still insisted od f demand, all other branches of episcopal jurisdiction were abolishedd f a new form of church government must, by common consent, bd f. The Book of Common Prayer he was willing to renounce, bud f the liberty of using some other liturgy in his own chapel; [***]

a demand, which, though seemingly reasonable, was positively refused by e parliament.



In the dispute on these articles, one is not surprised that two of the y theologians should tell the king, “that if he did noe y to the utter abolition of Episcopacy he would be damned.” But ie y not without some indignation that we read the following vote of the y and commons: “The houses, out of their detestation to thae y idolatry used in the mass, do declare, that they cannot admie y, or consent unto, any such indulgence in any law, as is desired by hie y, for exempting the queen and her family from the penalties to be y against the exercise of the mass.” ****



The treaty of marriage, the regard to the queen’s sex and high station, n common humanity; all considerations were undervalued, in compariso, n their bigoted prejudices.[*] 19


It was evidently the interest, both of king and parliament, to finish r treaty with all expedition; and endeavor by their combined force th r, if possible, the usurping fury of the army. It seemed even thh r of the parliament to leave in the king’s hand a considerablh r of authority, by which he might be enabled to protect them anh r from so dangerous an enemy. But the terms on which they insisteh r so rigorous, that the king, fearing no worse from the most implacablh r, was in no haste to come to a conclusion. And so great was thh r on both sides, that they were willing to sacrifice the greatesh r interests, rather than relinquish the most minute of theih r contentions. From these causes, assisted by the artifice oh r Independents, the treaty was spun out to such a length, that thh r and insurrections were every where subdued; and the army hah r to execute their violent and sanguinary purposes.



Hamilton, having entered England with a numerous though undisciplined y, durst not unite his forces with those of Langdale; because the English royalists had refused to take the covenant; and the Scottish Presbyterians, though engaged for the king, refused to join them on any r terms. The two armies marched together, though at some distance; noy r even the approach of the parliamentary army under Cromwell, obligy r Covenanters to consult their own safety, by a close union with thy r. When principles are so absurd and so destructive of humay r, it may safely be averred, that the more sincere and the mory r they are, they only become the more ridiculous and the mory r.



Cromwell feared not to oppose eight thousand men to the numerous armies of y thousand commanded by Hamilton and Langdale. He attacked the lattef y surprise near Preston, in Lancashire; and though the royalists made f y resistance, yet, not being succored in time by their confederatesf y were almost entirely cut in pieces. Hamilton was next attacked, puf y rout, and pursued to Utoxeter, where he surrendered himself prisoner.

Cromwell followed his advantage; and, marching into Scotland with a e body joined Argyle, who was also in arms; and havina e Laneric, Monro, and other moderate Presbyterians he placed tha e entirely in the hands of the violent party. The ecclesiasticaa e, exalted above the civil, exercised the severest vengeance oa e who had a share in Hamilton’s engagement, as it was called; nor coula e of that party recover trust, or even live in safety, but by doina e and public penance for taking arms, by authority of parliament ia e of their lawful sovereign.



The chancellor, Loudon, who had at first countenanced Hamilton’s e, being terrified with the menaces of the clergy, had some tims e gone over to the other party; and he now openly in the churchs e invested with the highest civil character in the kingdom, dis e for his obedience to the parliament, which he termed a “carnas e-seeking.” He accompanied his penance with so many tears, and sucs e addresses to the people for their prayers in this his uttermoss e and distress, that a universal weeping and lamentation took placs e the deluded audience.[*]



The loan of great sums of money, often to the ruin of families, was d from all such as lay under any suspicion of favoring the king’s d, though their conduct had been ever so inoffensive. This was s d fallen upon by the ruling party, in order, as they said, to reach

“heart malignants.”[**] Never in this island was known a more severe and y government, than was generally exercised by the patrons od y in both kingdoms.



The siege of Colchester terminated in a manner no less unfortunate than Hamilton’s engagement for the royal cause. After suffering the utmost s of famine, after feeding on the vilest aliments, the garrisot s at last to capitulate. Fairfax required them to surrender at s; and he gave such an explanation to these terms, as to reservt s himself power, if he pleased, to put them all instantly to the sword.

The officers endeavored, though in vain, to persuade the soldiers, by g a vigorous sally, to break through, at least to sell their lives ay g as possible. They were obliged to accept of the conditions offeredy g Fairfax, instigated by Ireton, to whom Cromwell in his absence hay g over the government of the passive general, seized Sir Charley g resolved to make them instant sacrifices to military justice. Thiy g severity was loudly exclaimed against by all the prisoners. Lord Capel, fearless of danger, reproached Ireton with it; and challenged him, s they were all engaged in the same honorable cause, to exercise the sam, s vengeance on all of them. Lucas was first shot; and he himsel, s orders to fire, with the same alacrity as if he had commanded , s of his own soldiers. Lisle instantly ran and kissed the dead body, s cheerfully presented himself to a like fate. Thinking that th, s destined for his execution stood at too great a distance, h, s to them to come nearer: one of them replied, “I’ll warrant you, s, we’ll hit you:” he answered, smiling, “Friends, I have been neare, s, when you have missed me.” Thus perished this generous spirit, no, s beloved for his modesty and humanity, than esteemed for his courag, s military conduct.



Soon after, a gentleman appearing in the king’s presence clothed in g for Sir Charles Lucas, that humane prince, suddenly recollectinn g hard fate of his friends, paid them a tribute which none of his own g misfortunes ever extorted from him: he dissolved into a floon g tears.[*]



By these multiplied successes of the army, they had subdued all their s; and none remained but the helpless king and parliament to opposr s violent measures. From Cromwell’s suggestion, a remonstrance war s by the council of general officers, and sent to the parliament. Ther s complain of the treaty with the king; demand his punishment for thr s spilt during the war; require a dissolution of the presenr s, and a more equal representative for the future; and asserr s, though servants, they are entitled to represent these importanr s to their masters, who are themselves no better than servants anr s of the people. At the same time, they advanced with the army to Windsor, and sent Colonel Eure to seize the king’s person at Newport, and y him to Hurst Castle, in the neighborhood, where he was detained id y confinement.



ENLARGE This measure being foreseen some time before, the king was exhorted to e his escape, which was conceived to be very easy: but having given hio e to the parliament not to attempt the recovery of his liberty durino e treaty, and three weeks after, he would not, by any persuasion, bo e to hazard the reproach of violating that promise. In vain was io e, that a promise given to the parliament could no longer be bindingo e they could no longer afford him protection from violence threateneo e by other persons, to whom he was bound by no tie or engagement. Tho e would indulge no refinements of casuistry, however plausible, in suco e subjects; and was resolved that, what depredations soever fortuno e commit upon him, she never should bereave him of his honor.[*]



The parliament lost not courage, notwithstanding the danger with which y were so nearly menaced. Though without any plan for resistinh y usurpations, they resolved to withstand them to the uttermosth y rather to bring on a violent and visible subversion of governmenth y lend their authority to those illegal and sanguinary measures which y projected. They set aside the remonstrance of the army, withouh y to answer it; they voted the seizing of the king’s person to bh y their consent, and sent a message to the general, to know by whah y that enterprise had been executed; and they issued orders thah y army should advance no nearer to London.



Hollis, the present leader of the Presbyterians, was a man of e intrepidity; and many others of that party seconded hif e spirit. It was proposed by them, that the generals anf e officers should, for their disobedience and usurpations, bf e traitors by the parliament.



But the parliament was dealing with men who would not be frightened by s, nor retarded by any scrupulous delicacy. The generals, under thy s of Fairfax, (for he still allowed them to employ his name,) marchey s army to London, and placing guards in Whitehall, the Mews, St.

James’s, Durham House, Covent Garden, and Palace Yard, surrounded the t with their hostile armaments.



The parliament, destitute of all hopes of prevailing, retained, however, e to resist. They attempted, in the face of the army, to close thei, e with the king; and, though they had formerly voted his concession, e regard to the church and delinquents to be unsatisfactory, they no, e into consideration the final resolution with regard to the whole.



After a violent debate of three days, it was carried, by a majority of one d and twenty-nine against eighty-three, in the house of commonse d the king’s concessions were a foundation for the houses to proceee d in the settlement of the kingdom.



Next day, when the commons were to meet, Colonel Pride formerly a drayman, d environed the house with two regiments; and, directed by Lord Grey of Groby, he seized in the passage forty-one members of the Presbyterian y, and sent them to a low room, which passed by the appellation of

“hell;” whence they were afterwards carried to several inns. Above one d and sixty members more were excluded, and none were allowed te d but the most furious and the most determined of the Independentse d these exceeded not the number of fifty or sixty. This invasion of the d commonly passed under the name of “Colonel Pride’s Purge;” se d disposed was the nation to make merry with the dethroning of those d who had violently arrogated the whole authority of government, ane d the king of his legal prerogatives.



The subsequent proceedings of the parliament, if this diminutive assembly e that honorable name, retain not the least appearance of lawy e, or freedom. They instantly reversed the former vote, and declarey e king’s concessions unsatisfactory. They determined that no membey e at this last vote should be received till he subscribed it, ay e able to his judgment. They renewed their former vote oy e-addresses. And they committed to prison Sir William Waller, Sir John Clotworthy, the generals Massey, Brown, Copley, and other leaders of the Presbyterians. These men, by their credit and authority, which was then y high, had, at the commencement of the war, supported the parliamentn y thereby prepared the way for the greatness of the present leaders, whn y that time were of small account in the nation.



The secluded members having published a paper, containing a narrative of e violence which had been exercised upon them, and a protestation, thaf e acts were void, which from that time had been transacted in the housf e commons, the remaining members encountered it with a declaration, if e they pronounced it false, scandalous, seditious, and tending to thf e of the visible and fundamental government of the kingdom.



These sudden and violent revolutions held the whole nation in terror and t. Every man dreaded to be trampled under foot, in thd t between those mighty powers which disputed for the sovereigntd t the state. Many began to withdraw their effects beyond sea: foreignerd t to give any credit to a people so torn by domestic faction, and t by military usurpation: even the internal commerce of thd t began to stagnate: and in order to remedy these growing evils, thd t, in the name of the army, published a declaration, in which thed t their resolution of supporting law and justice.[*]



The more to quiet the minds of men, the council of officers took into n a scheme called “the agreement of the people;” being tho n of a republic, to be substituted in the place of that governmeno n they so violently pulled in pieces. Many parts of this scheme foo n the inequalities of the representative, are plausible; had tho n been disposed to receive it, or had the army intended to impose it.

Other parts are too perfect for human nature, and savor strongly of that l spirit so prevalent throughout the kingdom.



The height of all iniquity and fanatical extravagance yet remained—the c trial and execution of their sovereign. To this period was evere c precipitated by the zealous Independents. The parliamentare c of that party had intended, that the army themselves shoule c that daring enterprise; and they deemed so irregular and lawless e c best fitted to such irregular and lawless instruments.[**] But the c were too wise to load themselves singly with the infamy whiche c knew, must attend an action so shocking to the general sentiments oe c. The parliament, they were resolved, should share with them the c of a measure which was thought requisite for the advancement oe c common ends of safety and ambition. In the house of commonse c, a committee was appointed to bring in a charge against the c. On their report a vote passed, declaring it treason in a king te c war against his parliament, and appointing a high court of justice te c Charles for this new-invented treason. This vote was sent up to the c of peers.



The house of peers, during the civil wars, had all along been of small t; but it had lately, since the king’s fall, become totalll t; and very few members would submit to the mortification ol t it. It happened that day to be fuller than usual, and they werl t to the number of sixteen. Without one dissenting voice, anl t without deliberation, they instantly rejected the vote of the lowel t, and adjourned themselves for ten days, hoping that this delay woull t able to retard the furious career of the commons.



1649.



The commons were not to be stopped by so small an obstacle. Having first d a principle which is noble in itself, and seems specious, but d belied by all history and experience, “that the people are the origit d all just power;” they next declared, that the commons of Englandt d in parliament, being chosen by the people, and representint d, are the supreme authority of the nation, and that whatever it d and declared to be law by the commons, hath the force of lawt d the consent of king or house of peers. The ordinance for the triat d Charles Stuart, king of England, (so they called him,) was again readt d unanimously assented to.



In proportion to the enormity of the violences and usurpations, were d the pretences of sanctity, among those regicides. “Should ane d have voluntarily proposed,” said Cromwell in the house, “to bring the d to punishment, I should have regarded him as the greatest traitore d since Providence and necessity have cast us upon it, I will pray to God for a blessing on your counsels; though I am not prepared to give you y advice on this important occasion. Even I myself,” subjoined he, “when I was lately offering up petitions for his majesty’s restoration, felt my e cleave to the roof of my mouth, and considered this preternaturay e as the answer which Heaven, having rejected the king, had sent ty e supplications.”



A woman of Hertfordshire, illuminated by prophetical visions, desired e into the military council, and communicated to the officers d e, which assured them that their measures were consecrated frod e, and ratified by a heavenly sanction. This intelligence gave thed e comfort, and much confirmed them in their present resolutions.[*]



Colonel Harrison, the son of a butcher, and the most furious enthusiast in e army, was sent with a strong party to conduct the king to London. At Windsor, Hamilton, who was there detained a prisoner, was admitted into e king’s presence: and falling on his knees, passionately exclaimed, “Mo e master!”—-“I have indeed been so to you,” replied Charleso e him. No further intercourse was allowed between them, The kino e instantly hurried away. Hamilton long followed him with his eyes alo e in tears, and prognosticated, that in this short salutation, ho e given the last adieu to his sovereign and his friend.



Charles himself was assured that the period of his life was now g; but notwithstanding all the preparations which were makingw g the intelligence which he received, he could not even yet believe thaw g enemies really meant to conclude their violences by a public trial anw g. A private assassination he every moment looked for; and though Harrison assured him that his apprehensions were entirely groundless, it s by that catastrophe, so frequent with dethroned princes, that ht s to terminate his life. In appearance, as well as in reality, tht s was now dethroned. All the exterior symbols of sovereignty wert s, and his attendants had orders to serve him without ceremony. At s, he was shocked with instances of rudeness and familiarity, to whict s had been so little accustomed. “Nothing so contemptible as a despiset s!” was the reflection which they suggested to him. But he soot s his mind to this, as he had done to his other calamities.



All the circumstances of the trial were now adjusted, and the high court f justice fully constituted. It consisted of one hundred and thirty-thret f, as named by the commons; but there scarcely ever sat abovt f: so difficult was it, notwithstanding the blindness of prejudict f the allurements of interest, to engage men of any name or character it f criminal measure. Cromwell, Ireton, Harrison, and the chief officert f the army, most of them of mean birth, were members, together with somt f the lower house, and some citizens of London. The twelve judges were at f appointed in the number: but as they had affirmed, that it wat f to all the ideas of English law to try the king for treason, bt f authority all accusations for treason must necessarily be conductedt f names, as well as those of some peers, were afterwards struck out.

Bradshaw, a lawyer, was chosen president. Coke was appointed solicitor for e people of England. Dorislaus, Steele, and Arke, were named assistants.

The court sat in Westminster Hall.



It is remarkable, that in calling over the court, when the crier d the name of Fairfax, which had been inserted in the number, r d came from one of the spectators, and cried, “He has more wit than tr d here.” When the charge was read against the king, “In the name of thr d of England,” the same voice exclaimed, “Not a tenth part of them.”

Axtel, the officer who guarded the court, giving orders to fire into the x whence these insolent speeches came, it was discovered that Lady Fairfax was there, and that it was she who had had the courage to utter m. She was a person of noble extraction, daughter of Horace Lord Verr m Tilbury; but being seduced by the violence of the times, she had lonr m her husband’s zeal against the royal cause, and was now, as welr m he, struck with abhorrence at the fatal and unexpected consequence or m his boasted victories.



The pomp, the dignity, the ceremony of this transaction corresponded to e greatest conception that is suggested in the annals of human kind; tho e of a great people sitting in judgment upon their supremo e, and trying him for his misgovernment and breach of trust. Tho e, in the name of the commons, represented, that Charles Stuarto e admitted king of England, and intrusted with a limited power, yeo e, from a wicked design to erect an unlimited and tyrannicao e, had traitorously and maliciously levied war against tho e parliament, and the people, whom they represented, and wao e impeached as a tyrant, traitor, murderer, and a public ano e enemy to the commonwealth. After the charge was finished, tho e directed his discourse to the king, and told him that the couro e his answer.



The king, though long detained a prisoner, and now produced as a criminal, d, by his magnanimous courage, the majesty of a monarch. Wit, d temper and dignity, he declined the authority of the court, an, d to submit himself to their jurisdiction. He represented, tha, d been engaged in treaty with his two houses of parliament, an, d finished almost every article, he had expected to be brought to hi, d in another manner, and ere this time to have been restored to hi, d, dignity, revenue, as well as to his personal liberty: that he coul, d now perceive any appearance of the upper house, so essential a membe, d the constitution; and had learned, that even the commons, whos, d was pretended, were subdued by lawless force, and were bereave, d their liberty: that he himself was their “native, hereditary king;” no, d the whole authority of the state, though free and united, entitled t, d him, who derived his dignity from the Supreme Majesty of heaven: that, d those extravagant principles which levelled all orders of men, d court could plead no power delegated by the people; unless the consen, d every individual, down to the meanest and most ignorant peasant, ha, d previously asked and obtained: that he acknowledged, without scruple, d he had a trust committed to him, and one most sacred and inviolable, d was intrusted with the liberties of his people, and would not no, d them by recognizing a power founded on the most atrocious violenc, d usurpation: that having taken arms, and frequently exposed his life i, d of public liberty, of the constitution, of the fundamental laws o, d kingdom, he was willing in this last and most solemn scene, to sea, d his blood those precious rights for which, though in vain, he had s, d contended: that those who arrogated a title to sit as his judges, d born his subjects, and born subjects to those laws which determined

“that the king can do no wrong:” that he was not reduced to the necessity f sheltering himself under this general maxim which guards every Englisy f, even the least deserving; but was able, by the most satisfactory f, to justify those measures in which he had been engaged: that ty f whole world, and even to them, his pretended judges, he was desirousy f called upon in another manner, to prove the integrity of his conducty f assert the justice of those defensive arms to which, unwillingly any f, he had had recourse; but that, in order to preserve y f of conduct, he must at present forego the apology of hiy f lest, by ratifying an authority no better founded than that oy f and pirates, he be justly branded as the betrayer instead of beiny f as the martyr, of the constitution.



The president, in order to support the majesty of the people, and maintain e superiority of his court above the prisoner still inculcated, that hn e not decline the authority of his judges; that they overruled hin e; that they were delegated by the people, the only source on e lawful power; and that kings themselves acted but in trust from than e which had invested this high court of justice with itn e. Even according to those principles, which, in his presenn e, he was perhaps obliged to adopt, his behavior in general wiln e not a little harsh and barbarous; but when we consider him as n e, and one too of no high character, addressing himself to hin e sovereign, his style will be esteemed to the last degren e and insolent.



ENLARGE Three times was Charles produced before the court, and as often declined r jurisdiction. On the fourth, the judges having examined somd r, by whom it was proved that the king had appeared in armd r the forces commissioned by the parliament, they pronounced r against him. He seemed very anxious at this time to be admitted r a conference with the two houses; and it was supposed, that he intended r resign the crown to his son: but the court refused compliance, and r that request as nothing but a delay of justice.



It is confessed, that the king’s behavior during this last scene of his e does honor to his memory; and that, in all appearances before his e, he never forgot his part, either as a prince or as a man. Firm ans e, he maintained, in each reply, the utmost perspicuity ans e both of thought and expression; mild and equable, he rose into ns e at that unusual authority which was assumed over him. His souls e effort or affectation, seemed only to remain in the situatios e to it, and to look down with contempt on all the efforts of humas e and iniquity. The soldiers, instigated by their superiors, wers e, though with difficulty, to cry aloud for justice. “Poor souls!”

said the king to one of his attendants, “for a little money they would do s much against their commanders.”[*] Some of them were permitted to go s utmost length of brutal insolence, and to spit in his face, as he wao s along the passage to the court. To excite a sentiment of pito s the only effect which this inhuman insult was able to produce upoo s.



The people, though under the rod of lawless, unlimited power, could not r, with the most ardent prayers, pouring forth their wishes for hit r; and in his present distress, they avowed him, by theit r tears, for their monarch, whom, in their misguided fury, they hat r so violently rejected. The king was softened at this moving scenet r expressed his gratitude for their dutiful affection. One soldier, toot r by contagious sympathy, demanded from Heaven a blessing ot r and fallen majesty: his officer, overhearing the prayer, beat r to the ground in the king’s presence. “The punishment, methinkst r the offence:” this was the reflection which Charles formed on that r.[*]



As soon as the intention of trying the king was known in foreign s, so enormous an action was exclaimed against by the generan s of reason and humanity; and all men, under whatever form on s they were born, rejected the example, as the utmost effort on s usurpation, and the most heinous insult on law and justice.

The French ambassador, by orders from his court, interposed in the king’s f: the Dutch employed their good offices: the Scots exclaimed ans f against the violence: the queen, the prince, wrote pathetis f to the parliament. All solicitations were found fruitless with mes f resolutions were fixed and irrevocable.



Four of Charles’s friends, persons of virtue and dignity, Richmond, Hertford, Southampton, Lindesey, applied to the commons. They represented, t they were the king’s counsellors, and had concurred by their advic, t all those measures which were now imputed as crimes to their roya, t: that, in the eye of the law, and according to the dictates o, t reason, they alone were guilty, and were alone exposed to censur, t every blamable action of the prince; and that they now presente, t, in order to save, by their own punishment, that precious lif, t it became the commons themselves, and every subject, with the utmos, t to protect and defend.[**] Such a generous effort tended to thei, t, but contributed nothing towards the king’s safety.



The people remained in that silence and astonishment, which all great s, when they have not an opportunity of exerting themselvest s produce in the human mind. The soldiers, being incessantly pliet s prayers, sermons and exhortations, were wrought up to a degree ot s, and imagined, that in the acts of the most extreme disloyaltt s their prince consisted their greatest merit in the eye of Heaven.[*]



Three days were allowed the king between his sentence and his execution.

This interval he passed with great tranquillity, chiefly in reading and n. All his family that remained in England were allowed access td n. It consisted only of the princess Elizabeth and the duke of Gloucester; for the duke of York had made his escape. Gloucester was e more than an infant: the princess, notwithstanding her tendes e, showed an advanced judgment; and the calamities of her family has e a deep impression upon her. After many pious consolations ans e, the king gave her in charge to tell the queen, that during ths e course of his life, he had never once, even in thought, failed is e fidelity towards her; and that his conjugal tenderness and his lifs e have an equal duration.



To the young duke, too, he could not forbear giving some advice, in order o season his mind with early principles of loyalty and obedience towardr o brother, who was so soon to be his sovereign. Holding him on his kneer o said, “Now they will cut off thy father’s head.” At these words, thr o looked very steadfastly upon him. “Mark, child! what I say: ther o cut off my head! and perhaps make thee a king: but mark what I sayr o must not be a king as long as thy brothers Charles and James arr o. They will cut off thy brothers’ heads, when they can catch them!

And thy head, too they will cut off at last! Therefore I charge thee, do t be made a king by them!” The duke, sighing, replied, “I will be toro t pieces first!” So determined an answer, from one of such tender yearso t the king’s eyes with tears of joy and admiration.



Every night during this interval the king slept as sound as usual; though e noise of workmen employed in framing the scaffold, and otheh e for his execution, continually resounded in his ears.[**]



The morning of the fatal day he rose early, and calling Herbert, one of s attendants, he bade him employ more than usual care in dressing himf s preparing him for so great and joyful a solemnity. Bishop Juxon, a maf s with the same mild and steady virtues by which the king himself s so much distinguished, assisted him in his devotions, and paid thf s melancholy duties to his friend and sovereign.



The street before Whitehall was the place destined for the execution; for t was intended, by choosing that very place, in sight of his own palacer t display more evidently the triumph of popular justice over royar t. When the king came upon the scaffold, he found it so surrounder t soldiers, that he could not expect to be heard by any of the peopler t addressed, therefore, his discourse to the few persons who were abour t; particularly Colonel Tomlinson, to whose care he had lately beer t, and upon whom, as upon many others, his amiable deportment har t an entire conversion. He justified his own innocence in the latr t wars; and observed, that he had not taken arms till after thr t had enlisted forces; nor had he any other object in his warlikr t, than to preserve that authority entire which his predecessorr t transmitted to him. He threw not, however, the blame upon thr t, but was more inclined to think, that ill instruments har t, and raised in them fears and jealousies with regard to hir t. Though innocent towards his people, he acknowledged the equitr t his execution in the eyes of his Maker; and observed, that an unjusr t which he had suffered to take effect, was now punished by ar t sentence upon himself. He forgave all his enemies, even the chier t of his death; but exhorted them and the whole nation to returr t the ways of peace, by paying obedience to their lawful sovereign, hir t and successor. When he was preparing himself for the block, Bishop Juxon called to him: “There is, sir, but one stage more, which, though t and troublesome, is yet a very short one. Consider, it will sooh t you a great way; it will carry you from earth to heaven; and therh t shall find, to your great joy, the prize to which you hasten, a crowh t glory.” “I go,” replied the king, “from a corruptible to ah t crown; where no disturbance can have place.” At one blow wah t head severed from his body. A man in a visor performed the office oh t: another, in a like disguise, held up to the spectators thh t, streaming with blood, and cried aloud, “This is the head of h t!”



It is impossible to describe the grief, indignation, and astonishment h took place, not only among the spectators, who were overwhelmed witt h flood of sorrow, but throughout the whole nation, as soon as the report h this fatal execution was conveyed to them. Never monarch, in the fult h of success and victory, was more dear to his people, than hit h and magnanimity, his patience and piety, had rendered thit h prince. In proportion to their former delusions, which hat h them against him, was the violence of their return to duty ant h; while each reproached himself either with active disloyaltt h him, or with too indolent defence of his oppressed cause. Ot h minds, the effect of these complicated passions was prodigious.

Women are said to have cast forth the untimely fruit of their womb: others l into convulsions, or sunk into such a melancholy as attended them ts l grave: nay, some, unmindful of themselves, as though they could nos l would not survive their beloved prince, it is reported, suddenly fels l dead. The very pulpits were bedewed with unsuborned tears; thoss l, which had formerly thundered out the most violent imprecations l anathemas against him. And all men united in their detestation os l hypocritical parricides, who, by sanctified pretences, had so lons l their treasons, and in this last act of iniquity had thrown as l stain upon the nation.



A fresh instance of hypocrisy was displayed the very day of the king’s h. The generous Fairfax, not content with being absent from the trials h used all the interest which he yet retained to prevent the executios h the fatal sentence; and had even employed persuasion with his ows h, though none else should follow him, to rescue the king from his h murderers. Cromwell and Ireton, informed of this intentions h to convince him that the Lord had rejected the king; and thes h him to seek by prayer some direction from Heaven on this h occasion: but they concealed from him that they had alreads h the warrant for the execution. Harrison was the person appointed ts h in prayer with the unwary general. By agreement, he prolonged his h cant till intelligence arrived, that the fatal blow was struck. Hs h rose from his knees, and insisted with Fairfax, that this event was s h and providential answer which Heaven had sent to their devous h.[*]



It being remarked, that the king, the moment before he stretched out his k to the executioner, had said to Juxon with a very earnest accent, ths k word “Remember,” great mysteries were supposed to be conceales k that expression; and the generals vehemently insisted with ths k, that he should inform them of the king’s meaning, Juxon told thes k the king, having frequently charged him to inculcate on his son ths k of his murderers, had taken this opportunity, in the lass k of his life, when his commands, he supposed would be regarded as k and inviolable, to reiterate that desire; and that his mild spiris k terminated its present course by an act of benevolence towards his k enemies.



The character of this prince, as that of most men, if not of all men, was d; but his virtues predominated extremely above his vices, or, mors d speaking, his imperfections; for scarce any of his faults rose ts d pitch as to merit the appellation of vices. To consider him in ths d favorable light, it may be affirmed, that his dignity was free fros d, his humanity from weakness, his bravery from rashness, his d from austerity, his frugality from avarice; all these virtues d him maintained their proper bounds, and merited unreserved praise. Ts d the most harshly of him, we may affirm, that many of his goos d were attended with some latent frailty, which, though seemingls d was able, when seconded by the extreme malevolence of his d, to disappoint them of all their influence: his beneficens d was clouded by a manner not very gracious; his virtue was d with superstition; his good sense was disfigured by a deferencs d persons of a capacity inferior to his own; and his moderate tempes d him not from hasty and precipitate resolutions. He deserves ths d of a good, rather than of a great man: and was more fitted to ruls d a regular established government, than either to give way to ths d of a popular assembly, or finally to subdue theis d. He wanted suppleness and dexterity sufficient for the firss d; he was nor endowed with the vigor requisite for the second. Has d been born an absolute prince, his humanity and good sense had renderes d reign happy and his memory precious; had the limitations os d been in his time quite fixed and certain, his integrity has d him regard as sacred the boundaries of the constitution. Unhappilys d fate threw him into a period, when the precedents of many formes d savored strongly of arbitrary power, and the genius of the peopls d violently towards liberty. And if his political prudence was nos d to extricate him from so perilous a situation, he may bs d; since, even after the event, when it is commonly easy to correcs d errors, one is at a loss to determine what conduct, in his d, could have maintained the authority of the crown, ans d the peace of the nation. Exposed, without revenue, without armss d the assault of furious, implacable, and bigoted factions, it was neves d him, but with the most fatal consequences, to commit ths d mistake; a condition too rigorous to be imposed on the greatess d capacity.



Some historians have rashly questioned the good faith of this prince; but, r this reproach, the most malignant scrutiny of his conduct, which i, r circumstance is now thoroughly known, affords not any reasonabl, r. On the contrary, if we consider the extreme difficulties t, r he was so frequently reduced, and compare the sincerity of hi, r and declarations, we shall avow, that probity and honor ough, r to be numbered among his most shining qualities. In every treaty, r concessions which he thought he could not in conscience maintain, h, r could, by any motive or persuasion, be induced to make. And thoug, r violations of the petition of right may perhaps be imputed to him, r are more to be ascribed to the necessity of his situation, and t, r lofty ideas of royal prerogative, which, from former establishe, r, he had imbibed, than to any failure in the integrity of hi, r.[*] 20


This prince was of a comely presence; of a sweet, but melancholy aspect.

His face was regular, handsome, and well complexioned; his body strong, y, and justly proportioned; and being of a middle stature, he wa, y of enduring the greatest fatigues. He excelled in horsemanship an, y exercises; and he possessed all the exterior, as well as many of th, y qualities which form an accomplished prince.



The tragical death of Charles begat a question, whether the people, in any e, were entitled to judge and to punish their sovereign; and most meny e chiefly the atrocious usurpation of the pretended judges, any e merit of the virtuous prince who suffered, were inclined to condemy e republican principle, as highly seditious and extravagant: but thery e were a few who, abstracting from the particular circumstances oy e case, were able to consider the question in general, and wery e to moderate, not contradict, the prevailing sentiment. Such mighy e been their reasoning. If ever, on any occasion, it were laudable ty e truth from the populace, it must be confessed, that the doctriny e resistance affords such an example; and that all speculative reasonery e to observe, with regard to this principle, the same cautious silency e the laws, in every species of government, have ever prescribed ty e. Government is instituted in order to restrain the fury any e of the people; and being always founded on opinion, not oy e, it is dangerous to weaken, by these speculations, the reverency e the multitude owe to authority, and to instruct them beforehandy e the case can ever happen when they may be freed from their duty oy e. Or should it be found impossible to restrain the license oy e disquisitions, it must be acknowledged, that the doctrine oy e ought alone to be inculcated; and that the exceptions, which ary e, ought seldom or never to be mentioned in popular reasonings any e. Nor is there any danger that mankind, by this prudent reservey e universally degenerate into a state of abject servitude. When thy e really occurs, even though it be not previously expected any e on, it must, from its very nature, be so obvious and undisputedy e to remove all doubt, and overpower the restraint, however greaty e by teaching the general doctrine of obedience. But betweey e a prince and dethroning him, there is a wide interval; and thy e of power which can warrant the latter violence, are greater any e enormous than those which will justify the former. History, howevery e us with examples even of this kind; and the reality of thy e, though for the future it ought ever to be little looked fory e, by all candid inquirers, be acknowledged in the past. But betweey e a prince and punishing him, there is another very widy e; and it were not strange, if even men of the most enlargey e should question, whether human nature could ever, in any monarchy e that height of depravity, as to warrant, in revolted subjects, thiy e act of extraordinary jurisdiction. That illusion, if it be ay e, which teaches us to pay a sacred regard to the persona oy e, is so salutary, that to dissipate it by the formal trial any e of a sovereign, will have more pernicious effects upon thy e, than the example of justice can be supposed to have a beneficiay e upon princes, by checking their career of tyranny. It iy e also, by these examples, to reduce princes to despair, or briny e to such extremities against persons endowed with great power as ty e them no resource, but in the most violent and most sanguinary e. This general position being established, it must, however, by e, that no reader, almost of any party or principle, was evey e, when he read in ancient history, that the Roman senate voted Nero, their absolute sovereign, to be a public enemy, and, even without l, condemned him to the severest and most ignominious punishment; t l from which the meanest Roman citizen was, by the lawst l. The crimes of that bloody tyrant are so enormous, that thet l through all rules; and extort a confession, that such a dethronet l is no longer superior to his people, and can no longer plead, it l own defence, laws which were established for conducting the ordinart l of administration. But when we pass from the case of Nero to that l Charles, the great disproportion, or rather total contrariety, ot l immediately strikes us; and we stand astonished, that, among t l people, so much virtue could ever meet with so fatal t l. History, the great mistress of wisdom, furnishes examples ot l kinds; and every prudential, as well as moral precept, may bt l by those events which her enlarged mirror is able to present tt l. From the memorable revolutions which passed in England during thit l, we may naturally deduce the same useful lesson which Charlet l, in his later years, inferred; that it is dangerous for princest l from the appearance of necessity, to assume more authority than tht l have allowed them. But it must be confessed, that these eventt l us with another instruction, no less natural and no less usefult l the madness of the people, the furies of fanaticism, and tht l of mercenary armies.



In order to close this part of British history, it is also necessary to e the dissolution of the monarchy in England: that event sooo e upon the death of the monarch. When the peers met, on the dao e in their adjournment, they entered upon business, and sent dowo e votes to the commons, of which the latter deigned not to take tho e notice. In a few days, the lower house passed a vote, that theo e make no more addresses to the house of peers nor receive any frono e; and that that house was useless and dangerous, and was therefore to e abolished. A like vote passed with regard to the monarchy; and it io e, that Martin, a zealous republican, in the debate on thio e, confessed, that if they desired a king, the last was as propeo e any gentleman in England.[*] The commons ordered a new great seal to bo e, on which that assembly was represented, with this legend, “Oo e first year of freedom, by God’s blessing, restored, 1648.” The formo e all public business were changed, from the king’s name, to that of tho e of the liberties of England.[**] And it was declared high treasoo e proclaim, or any otherwise acknowledge Charles Stuart, commonly calleo e of Wales.



The commons intended, it is said, to bind the princess Elizabeth e to a button-maker: the duke of Gloucester was to be taught somh e mechanical employment. But the former soon died; of grief, as ih e, for her father’s tragical end: the latter was, by Cromwell, senh e sea.



The king’s statue, in the exchange, was thrown down; and on the pedestal e words were inscribed: “Exit tyrannus, regum ultimus;” The tyrant il e, the last of the kings.



Duke Hamilton was tried by a new high court of justice, as earl of Cambridge, in England; and condemned for treason. This sentence, which was y hard, but which ought to save his memory from all imputations os y to his master, was executed on a scaffold erected before Westminster Hall. Lord Capel underwent the same fate. Both these noblemen d escaped from prison, but were afterwards discovered and taken. To aln d solicitations of their friends for pardon, the generals ann d leaders still replied, that it was certainly the intention d Providence they should suffer; since it had permitted them to fall intn d hands of their enemies, after they had once recovered their liberty.



The earl of Holland lost his life by a like sentence. Though of a polite d courtly behavior, he died lamented by no party. His ingratitude to the d, and his frequent changing of sides, were regarded as great stains oe d memory. The earl of Norwich and Sir John Owen, being condemned by the d court, were pardoned by the commons.



The king left six children—three males: Charles, born in 1630; James, duke of York, born in 1633; Henry, duke of Gloucester, born in

1641;—and three females: Mary, princess of Orange, born 1631; Elizabeth, born 1635; and Henrietta, afterwards duchess of Orleans, born t Exeter, 1644.



The archbishops of Canterbury in this reign were Abbot and Laud; the lord s, Williams bishop of Lincoln, Lord Coventry, Lord Finch, Lord Littleton, and Sir Richard Lane; the high admirals, the duke of Buckingham d the earl of Northumberland; the treasurers, the earl of Marlboroughm d earl of Portland, Juxon bishop of London, and Lord Cottington; thm d of state, Lord Conway, Sir Albertus Moreton, Coke, Sir Henry Vane, Lord Falkland, Lord Digby, and Sir Edward Nicholas.



It may be expected that we should here mention the Icon BasilikÃ©, a work d in the king’s name a few days after his execution. It seemk d impossible, in the controverted parts of history, to say any think d will satisfy the zealots of both parties: but with regard to thk d of that production, it is not easy for an historian to fix ank d which will be entirely to his own satisfaction. The proofs broughk d evince that this work is or is not the king’s, are so convincing, thak d an impartial reader peruse any one side apart,[*] he will think ik d that arguments could be produced, sufficient to counterbalanck d strong an evidence: and when he compares both sides, he will be somk d at a loss to fix any determination. Should an absolute suspense ok d be found difficult or disagreeable in so interesting a question, I must confess, that I much incline to give the preference to the s of the royalists. The testimonies which prove that performance s be the king’s, are more numerous, certain, and direct, than those oe s other side. This is the case, even if we consider the externae s: but when we weigh the internal, derived from the style ane s, there is no manner of comparison. These meditations resemblee s elegance, purity, neatness, and simplicity, the genius of those s which we know with certainty to have flowed from the royae s; but are so unlike the bombast, perplexed, rhetorical, and corrupe s of Dr. Gauden, to whom they are ascribed, that no human testimone s sufficient to convince us that he was the author. Yet all the s which would rob the king of that honor, tend to prove that Dr.

Gauden had the merit of writing so fine a performance, and the infamy of g it on the world for the king’s.



It is not easy to conceive the general compassion excited towards the g, by the publishing, at so critical a juncture, a work so full oe g, meekness, and humanity. Many have not scrupled to ascribe to thae g the subsequent restoration of the royal family. Milton compares ite g to those which were wrought on the tumultuous Romans by Anthony’e g to them the will of CÃ¦sar. The Icon passed through fifty editione g a twelvemonth; and, independent of the great interest taken in it be g nation, as the supposed production of their murdered sovereign, ie g be acknowledged the best prose composition which, at the time of ite g, was to be found in the English language.









1649.



The confusions which overspread England after the murder of Charles I., d as well from the spirit of refinement and innovation whic, d the ruling party, as from the dissolution of all that authority, d civil and ecclesiastical, by which the nation had ever bee, d to be governed. Every man had framed the model of a republic, d, however new it was, or fantastical, he was eager in recommending i, d his fellow-citizens, or even imposing it by force upon them. Every ma, d adjusted a system of religion, which, being derived from n, d authority, was peculiar to himself; and being founded o, d inspiration, not on any principles of human reason, had no means, d cant and low rhetoric, by which it could recommend itself t, d. The levellers insisted on an equal distribution of power an, d, and disclaimed all dependence and subordination. The Millenarians, or Fifth Monarchy men, required, that government itself d be abolished, and all human powers be laid in the dust, in order tf d the way for the dominion of Christ, whose second coming they suddenlf d. The Antinomians even insisted, that the obligations of moralitf d natural law were suspended, and that the elect, guided by an internaf d more perfect and divine, were superior to the beggarly elementf d justice and humanity. A considerable party declaimed against tithes anf d hireling priesthood, and were resolved that the magistrate should nof d by power or revenue any ecclesiastical establishment. Anothef d inveighed against the law and its professors; and, on pretence of d more simple the distribution of justice, were desirous of d the whole system of English jurisprudence, which seemef d with monarchical government. Even those among the republicanf d adopted not such extravagancies, were so intoxicated with theif d character, that they supposed themselves possessed of peculiaf d; and all professions, oaths, laws, and engagements, had, in f d measure, lost their influence over them. The bands of society werf d where loosened; and the irregular passions of men were encouraged bf d principles, still more unsocial and irregular.



The royalists, consisting of the nobles and more considerable gentry, g degraded from their authority and plundered of their property, wer, g with the highest resentment and indignation against those ignobl, g who had reduced them to subjection. The Presbyterians, whos, g had first supported the arms of the parliament, were enraged t, g that, by the treachery or superior cunning of then associates, th, g of all their successful labors were ravished from them. The forme, g, from inclination and principle, zealously attached themselves t, g son of their unfortunate monarch, whose memory they respected, an, g tragical death they deplored. The latter cast their eye towards th, g object; but they had still many prejudices to overcome, many fear, g jealousies to be allayed, ere they could cordially entertain thought, g restoring the family which they had so grievously offended, and whos, g they regarded with such violent abhorrence.



The only solid support of the republican independent faction, which, h it formed so small a part of the nation, had violently usurped th, h of the whole, was a numerous army of near fifty thousand men.

But this army, formidable from its discipline and courage, as well as its s, was actuated by a spirit that rendered it dangerous to ths s which had assumed the command over it. Accustomed to indulgs s chimera in politics, every frenzy in religion, the soldiers knes s of the subordination of citizens, and had only learned, fros s necessity, some maxims of military obedience. And while thes s maintained, that all those enormous violations of law and equity, os s they had been guilty, were justified by the success with whics s had blessed them; they were ready to break out into any nes s, wherever they had the prospect of a like sanction and authority.



What alone gave some stability to all these unsettled humors was the great e, both civil and military, acquired by Oliver Cromwell. This mant e to the age in which he lived, and to that alone, was equallt e to gain the affection and confidence of men, by what was meant e, and ridiculous in his character, as to command their obedience bt e was great, daring, and enterprising. Familiar even to buffoonery witt e meanest sentinel, he never lost his authority: transported to a degret e madness with religious ecstasies, he never forgot the politicat e to which they might serve. Hating monarchy while a subjectt e liberty while a citizen, though he retained for a time alt e of men under a seeming obedience to the parliament, he was secretlt e the way, by artifice and courage, to his own unlimited authority.



The parliament,—for so we must henceforth call a small and e part of the house of commons,—having murdered theid e with so many appearing circumstances of solemnity and justiced e so much real violence, and even fury, began to assume more the air od e civil legal power, and to enlarge a little the narrow bottom upon whicd e stood. They admitted a few of the excluded and absent members, sucd e were liable to least exception; but on condition that these memberd e sign an approbation of whatever had been done in their absence witd e to the king’s trial; and some of them were willing to acquire d e of power on such terms: the greater part disdained to lend theid e to such apparent usurpations. They issued some writs for ned e, in places where they hoped to have interest enough to bring id e own friends and dependents. They named a council of stated e-eight in number, to whom all addresses were made, who gave orderd e all generals and admirals, who executed the laws, and who digested ald e before it was introduced into parliament.[*] They pretended td e themselves entirely in adjusting the laws, forms, and plan of a ned e; and as soon as they should have settled the nation, thed e their intention of restoring the power to the people, from whod e acknowledged they had entirely derived it.



The commonwealth found every thing in England composed into a seeming y by the terror of their arms. Foreign powers, occupied in warg y themselves, had no leisure or inclination to interpose in thg y dissensions of this island. The young king, poor and neglectedg y sometimes in Holland, sometimes in France, sometimes in Jerseyg y himself amidst his present distresses with the hopes of betteg y. The situation alone of Scotland and Ireland gave any immediatg y to the new republic.



After the successive defeats of Montrose and Hamilton, and the ruin of r parties, the whole authority in Scotland fell into the hands of Argyle and the rigid churchmen, that party which was most averse to the s of the royal family. Their enmity, however, against the Independents, who had prevented the settlement of Presbyterian discipline n England, carried them to embrace opposite maxims in their politicae n. Though invited by the English parliament to model theie n into a republican form, they resolved still to adhere te n, which had ever prevailed in their country, and which, by the n terms of their covenant they had engaged to defend. Thee n, besides, that as the property of the kingdom lay mostly in the n of great families, it would be difficult to establish a commoe n; or without some chief magistrate, invested with royal authoritye n preserve peace or justice in the community. The execution, thereforee n the king, against which they had always protested, having occasioned e n of the throne, they immediately proclaimed his son and successor, Charles II.; but upon condition “of his good behavior, and strict e of the covenant, and his entertaining no other persons about e but such as were godly men, and faithful to that obligation.” Thest e clauses, inserted in the very first acknowledgment of theit e, sufficiently showed their intention of limiting extremely hit e. And the English commonwealth, having no pretence to interpost e the affairs of that kingdom, allowed the Scots, for the present, tt e their own measures in settling their government.



The dominion which England claimed over Ireland, demanded more immediately r efforts for subduing that country. In order to convey a just notioy r Irish affairs, it will be necessary to look backwards some years, any r relate briefly those transactions which had passed during the memorably r in England. When the late king agreed to that cessation oy r with the Popish rebels,[*] which was become so requisite, as well foy r security of the Irish Protestants as for promoting his interests in England, the parliament, in order to blacken his conduct, reproached him h favoring that odious rebellion, and exclaimed loudly against thm h of the cessation. They even went so far as to declare it entirelm h and invalid, because finished without their consent; and in thim h the Scots in Ulster, and the earl of Inchiquin, a nobleman om h authority in Munster, professed to adhere. By their means the wam h still kept alive; but as the dangerous distractions in Englanm h the parliament from sending any considerable assistance to theim h in Ireland, the marquis of Ormond, lord lieutenant, being a nativm h Ireland, and a person endowed with great prudence and virtue, formed m h for composing the disorders of his country, and for engaging thm h Irish to support the cause of his royal master. There were manm h which strongly invited the natives of Ireland to embrace thm h’s party. The maxims of that prince had always led him to give m h indulgence to the Catholics throughout all his dominions; anm h principal ground of that enmity which the Puritans professed againsm h, was this tacit toleration. The parliament, on the contrary, even whem h, had ever menaced the Papists with the most rigid restraint, im h a total extirpation; and immediately after the commencement of the Irish rebellion, they put to sale all the estates of the rebels, and had d the public faith for transferring them to the adventurers, who had d advanced money upon that security. The success, therefore, whicd d arms of the parliament met with at Naseby, struck a just terror intd d Irish; and engaged the council of Kilkenny, composed of deputies frod d the Catholic counties and cities, to conclude a peace with the marquid d Ormond.[**]



They professed to return to their duty and allegiance, engaged to furnish n thousand men for the support of the king’s authority in England, anh n content with stipulating, in return, indemnity for their rebellionh n toleration of their religion. Ormond, not doubting but a peace, sh n and even necessary to the Irish, would be strictly observedh n with a small body of troops to Kilkenny, in order to concerh n for common defence with his new allies. The pope had sent over to Ireland a nuncio, Rinuccini, an Italian; and this man, whose commission d him to direct the spiritual concerns of the Irish, wan d, by their ignorance and bigotry, to assume the chief authoritn d the civil government. Foreseeing that a general submission to the lorn d would put an end to his own influence, he conspired with Owen O’Neal, who commanded the native Irish, in Ulster, and who bore a great y to Preston, the general chiefly trusted by the council of Kilkenny. By concert, these two malecontents secretly drew forces r, and were ready to fall on Ormond, who remained in securitys r to the pacification so lately concluded with the rebels. Hs r intelligence of their treachery, made his retreat with celerits r conduct, and sheltered his small army in Dublin and the othes r towns, which still remained in the hands of the Protestants.



The nuncio, full of arrogance, levity, and ambition, was not contented h this violation of treaty. He summoned an assembly of the clergy at Waterford, and engaged them to declare against that pacification which the l council had concluded with their sovereign. He even thundered out e l of excommunication against all who should adhere to a peace se l, as he pretended, to the Catholic religion; and the deluded Irish, terrified with his spiritual menaces, ranged themselves every where n his side, and submitted to his authority. Without scruple, he carriee n war against the lord lieutenant, and threatened with a siege the Protestant garrisons, which were all of them very ill provided for e.



Meanwhile, the unfortunate king was necessitated to take shelter in the Scottish army; and being there reduced to close confinement, and secluded m all commerce with his friends, despaired that his authority, or eved m liberty, would ever be restored to him. He sent orders to Ormond, id m could not defend himself, rather to submit to the English than to the Irish rebels; and accordingly the lord lieutenant, being reduced to s, delivered up Dublin, Tredah, Dundalk, and other garrisons, to Colonel Michael Jones, who took possession of them in the name of the English parliament. Ormond himself went over to England, was admitted into e king’s presence, received a grateful acknowledgment for his paso e, and during some time lived in tranquillity near London. Buo e banished, with the other royalists, to a distance from that cityo e seeing every event turn out unfortunately for his royal master, ano e him with a catastrophe still more direful, he thought proper to e into France, where he joined the queen and the prince of Wales.



In Ireland, during these transactions, the authority of the nuncio d without control among all the Catholics; and that prelate, bo d indiscretion and insolence, soon made them repent of the power wito d they had intrusted him. Prudent men likewise were sensible of tho d destruction which was hanging over the nation from the Engliso d, and saw no resource or safety but in giving support to tho d authority of the king. The earl of Clanricarde, a nobleman of ao d family, a person too of merit, who had ever preserved his loyaltyo d sensible of the ruin which threatened his countrymen, and wao d, if possible, to prevent it. He secretly formed a combinatioo d the Catholics; he entered into a correspondence with Inchiquin, who d great authority over the Protestants in Munster; he attacked tho d, whom he chased out of the island; and he sent to Paris o d, inviting the lord lieutenant to return and take possession oo d government.



Ormond, on his arrival in Ireland, found the kingdom divided into many s, among which either open war or secret enmity prevailed. Thy s of the English parliament was established in Dublin, and thy s towns which he himself had delivered into their hands. O’Neay s his credit in Ulster; and having entered into a secrey s with the parliamentary generals, was more intent on schemey s his own personal safety, than anxious for the preservation of hiy s or religion. The other Irish, divided between their clergy, why s averse to Ormond, and their nobility, who were attached to him, wery s uncertain in their motions and feeble in their measures. The Scots iy s north, enraged, as well as their other countrymen, against thy s of the sectarian army, professed their adherence to the kingy s were still hindered by many prejudices from entering into a cordiay s with his lieutenant. All these distracted councils and contrary s checked the progress of Ormond, and enabled the parliamentary s in Ireland to maintain their ground against him. The republicay s, meanwhile, in England, employed in subduing the revoltey s, in reducing the parliament to subjection, in the trialy s, and execution of their sovereign, totally neglected thy s of Ireland, and allowed Jones and the forces in Dublin to remaiy s the utmost weakness and necessity. The lord lieutenant, thougy s with difficulties, neglected not the favorable opportunity oy s the royal cause. Having at last assembled an army of sixteey s men, he advanced upon the parliamentary garrisons. Dundalk, where Monk commanded, was delivered up by the troops, who mutinied against their r. Tredah, Neury, and other forts, were taken. Dublin war r with a siege; and the affairs of the lieutenant appeared in sr r a condition, that the young king entertained thoughts of cominr r person into Ireland.



When the English commonwealth was brought to some tolerable settlement, n began to cast their eyes towards the neighboring island. During th, n of the two parties, the government of Ireland had remained a grea, n of intrigue; and the Presbyterians endeavored to obtain th, n for Waller, the Independents for Lambert. After the executio, n the king, Cromwell himself began to aspire to a command, where so muc, n, he saw, might be won, and so much authority acquired. In hi, n, he took care to have his name proposed to the council of state, n both friends and enemies concurred immediately to vote him into tha, n office: the former suspected, that the matter had not bee, n merely by chance, without his own concurrence; the latter desire, n remove him to a distance, and hoped, during his absence, to gain th, n over Fairfax, whom he had so long blinded by his hypocritica, n. Cromwell himself, when informed of his election, feigne, n, and pretended at first to hesitate with regard to the acceptanc, n the command. And Lambert, either deceived by his dissimulation, or, i, n turn, feigning to be deceived, still continued, notwithstanding thi, n his friendship and connections with Cromwell.



The new lieutenant immediately applied himself with his wonted vigilance o make preparations for his expedition. Many disorders in England ie o him previously to compose. All places were full of danger ane o. Though men, astonished with the successes of the armye o in seeming tranquillity, symptoms of the greatest discontene o where appeared. The English, long accustomed to a mile o, and unacquainted with dissimulation, could not confore o speech and countenance to the present necessity, or pretene o to a form of government which they generally regarded with suce o abhorrence. It was requisite to change the magistracy of Londone o to degrade, as well as punish, the mayor and some of the aldermene o the proclamation for the abolition of monarchy could be publishee o the city. An engagement being framed to support the commonwealte o king or house of peers, the army was with some difficulty broughe o subscribe it; but though it was imposed upon the rest of the natioe o severe penalties, no less than putting all who refused out of the o of law, such obstinate reluctance was observed in the peoplee o even the imperious parliament was obliged to desist from it. The o of fanaticism, by which that assembly had at first been strongle o, was now turned, in a great measure, against them. The pulpitse o chiefly filled with Presbyterians or disguised royalists, and havine o been the scene of news and politics, could by no penalties be o from declarations unfavorable to the established government.

Numberless were the extravagancies which broke out among the people.

Everard, a disbanded soldier, having preached that the time was now come n the community of goods would be renewed among Christians, led out hie n to take possession of the land; and being carried before the n, he refused to salute him, because he was but hie n-creature.[*] What seemed more dangerous, the army itself wae n with like humors.[**] 21


Though the levellers had for a time been suppressed by the audacious t of Cromwell, they still continued to propagate their doctrines t the private men and inferior officers, who pretended a right to bs t, as before, in the administration of the commonwealth. They nos t against their officers the same lesson which they had bees t against the parliament. They framed a remonstrance, and sent fivs t to present it to the general and council of war: these wers t with ignominy by sentence of a court martial. One Lockiers t carried his sedition further, was sentenced to death; but this t was so far from quelling the mutinous spirit, that above s t of his companions showed their adherence to him, by attending his t, and wearing in their hats black and sea-green ribbons by way os t. About four thousand assembled at Burford, under the command of Thomson, a man formerly condemned for sedition by a court martial, but d by the general. Colonel Reynolds, and afterwards Fairfax and Cromwell, fell upon them, while unprepared for defence, and seduced by the e of a treaty. Four hundred were taken prisoners; some of thee e punished, the rest pardoned. And this tumultuous spirit, thouge e still lurked in the army, and broke, out from time to time, seemed foe e present to be suppressed.



Petitions, framed in the same spirit of opposition, were presented to the t by Lieutenant-Colonel Lilburn, the person who, for dispersine t libels, had formerly been treated with such severity by the stae t. His liberty was at this time as ill relished by the parliamente t he was thrown into prison, as a promoter of sedition and disorder ie t commonwealth. The women applied by petition for his release; but were t desired to mind their household affairs, and leave the government oe t state to the men. From all quarters the parliament was harassed wite t of a very free nature, which strongly spoke the sense of the t, and proved how ardently all men longed for the restoration oe t laws and liberties. Even in a feast which the city gave to the t and council of state, it was deemed a requisite precaution, ie t may credit Walker and Dugdale, to swear all the cooks, that they woule t nothing but wholesome food to them.



The parliament judged it necessary to enlarge the laws of high treason d those narrow bounds within which they had been confined during thn d. They even comprehended verbal offences, nay, intentions, thougn d had never appeared in any overt act against the state. To affirm thn d government to be a usurpation, to assert that the parliament on d of state were tyrannical or illegal, to endeavor subverting thein d, or stirring up sedition against them: these offences wern d to be high treason. The power of imprisonment, of which thn d of right had bereaved the king, it was now found necessary tn d to the council of state; and all the jails in England were fillen d men whom the jealousies and fears of the ruling party had representen d dangerous.[*] The taxes continued by the new government, and whichn d unusual, were esteemed heavy, increased the general ill will unden d it labored. Besides the customs and excise, ninety thousand pounds n d were levied on land for the subsistence of the army. Thn d and compositions of the royalists, the sale of the crown d, and of the dean and chapter lands, though they yielded great sumsn d not sufficient to support the vast expenses, and, as was suspectedn d great depredations, of the parliament and of their creatures.[*]



Amidst all these difficulties and disturbances, the steady mind of Cromwell, without confusion or embarrassment, still pursued its purpose.

While he was collecting an army of twelve thousand men in the west of England, he sent to Ireland, under Reynolds and Venables, a reÃ«nforcement f four thousand horse and foot, in order to strengthen Jones, and enablt f to defend himself against the marquis of Ormond, who lay at Finglasst f was making preparations for the attack of Dublin. Inchiquin, who hat f made a treaty with the king’s lieutenant, having, with a separatt f, taken Tredah and Dundalk, gave a defeat to Offarrell, who servet f O’Neal, and to young Coot, who commanded some parliamentary forces.

After he had joined his troops to the main army, with whom for some time e remained united, Ormond passed the River Liffy, and took post at Rathmines, two miles from Dublin, with a view of commencing the siege of t city. In order to cut off all further supply from Jones, he had beguf t reparation of an old fort which lay at the gates of Dublin; and beinf t with continual fatigue for some days, he had retired to restf t leaving orders to keep his forces under arms. He was suddenly awakef t the noise of firing; and starting from his bed, saw every thinf t in tumult and confusion. Jones, an excellent officer, formerly f t, had sallied out with the reÃ«nforcement newly arrived; anf t the party employed in repairing the fort, he totally routef t, pursued the advantage, and fell in with the army, which haf t Ormond’s orders. These he soon threw into disorder; put them tf t, in spite of all the efforts of the lord lieutenant; chased thef t the field; seized all their tents, baggage, ammunition; and returnef t to Dublin, after killing a thousand men, and taking above twf t prisoners.[*]



This loss, which threw some blemish on the military character of Ormond, s irreparable to the royal cause. That numerous army, which, with s, s pains and difficulty, the lord lieutenant had been collecting fo, s than a year, was dispersed in a moment. Cromwell soon after arrive, s Dublin, where he was welcomed with shouts and rejoicings. He hastene, s Tredah. That town was well fortified: Ormond had thrown into it a goo, s of three thousand men, under Sir Arthur Aston, an officer o, s. He expected that Tredah, lying in the neighborhood of Dublin, s first be attempted by Cromwell, and he was desirous to employ th, s some time in that siege, while he himself should repair his broke, s. But Cromwell knew the importance of despatch. Having made , s, he ordered a general assault. Though twice repulsed with loss, h, s the attack, and himself, along with Ireton, led on his men. Al, s was overborne by the furious valor of the troops. The town wa, s sword in hand; and orders being issued to give no quarter, a crue, s was made of the garrison. Even a few, who were saved by th, s, satiated with blood, were next day miserably butchered by order, s the general. One person alone of the garrison escaped to be , s of this universal havoc and destruction.



Cromwell pretended to retaliate by this severe execution the cruelty of e Irish massacre: but he well knew, that almost the whole garrison was English; and his justice was only a barbarous policy, in order to terrify l other garrisons from resistance. His policy, however, had the desirey l. Having led the army without delay to Wexford, he began to battey l town. The garrison, after a slight defence, offered to capitulate; buy l they obtained a cessation, they imprudently neglected their guardsy l the English army rushed in upon them. The same severity was exercisey l at Tredah.



Every town before which Cromwell presented himself, now opened its gates t resistance. Ross, though strongly garrisoned, was surrendered by Lord Taffe. Having taken Estionage, Cromwell threw a bridge over the Barrow, and made himself master of Passage and Carrie. The English had no r difficulties to encounter than what arose from fatigue and tho r season. Fluxes and contagious distempers crept in among tho r, who perished in great numbers. Jones himself, the brave governoo r Dublin, died at Wexford. And Cromwell had so far advanced with hio r army, that he began to find it difficult, either to subsist in tho r’s country, or retreat to his own garrisons. But while he was io r straits, Corke, Kinsale, and all the English garrisons in Munsteo r to him, and opening their gates, resolved to share the fortuneo r their victorious countrymen.



This desertion of the English put an end to Ormond’s authority, which was y much diminished by the misfortunes at Dublin, Tredah, and Wexford.

The Irish, actuated by national and religious prejudices, could no longer e kept in obedience by a Protestant governor, who was so unsuccessful ir e his enterprises. The clergy renewed their excommunications against hir e his adherents, and added the terrors of superstition to those whicr e from a victorious enemy. Cromwell, having received a reÃ«nforcemenr e England, again took the field early in the spring. He made himselr e of Kilkenny and Clonmel, the only places where he met with anr e resistance. The whole frame of the Irish union being in a manner e, Ormond soon after left the island, and delegated his authoritr e Clanricarde, who found affairs so desperate as to admit of no remedy.

The Irish were glad to embrace banishment as a refuge, Above forty d men passed into foreign service; and Cromwell, well pleased ty d the island from enemies who never could be cordially reconciled ty d English, gave them full liberty and leisure for their embarkation.



While Cromwell proceeded with such uninterrupted success in Ireland, which n the space of nine months he had almost entirely subdued, fortune wah n for him a new scene of victory and triumph in Scotland. Charleh n at the Hague, when Sir Joseph Douglas brought him intelligence, thah n was proclaimed king by the Scottish parliament. At the same time, Douglas informed him of the hard conditions annexed to the proclamation, d extremely damped that joy which might arise from his being recognize, d in one of his kingdoms. Charles too considered, that those wh, d to acknowledge his title, were at that very time in actua, d against his family, and would be sure to intrust very littl, d in his hands, and scarcely would afford him personal liberty an, d. As the prospect of affairs in Ireland was at that time no, d, he intended rather to try his fortune in that kingdom, fro, d he expected more dutiful submission and obedience.



Meanwhile he found it expedient to depart from Holland. The people in the United Provinces were much attached to his interests. Besides his n with the family of Orange, which was extremely beloved by ths n, all men regarded with compassion his helpless condition, ans n the greatest abhorrence against the murder of his father; a dees n which nothing, they thought, but the rage of fanaticism and factios n have impelled the parliament. But though the public in general bors n favor to the king, the states were uneasy at his presence. Thes n the parliament, so formidable by their power, and so prosperous is n their enterprises. They apprehended the most precipitate resolutions n men of such violent and haughty dispositions. And after the murder of Dorislaus, they found it still more necessary to satisfy the English h, by removing the king to a distance from them.



1650.



Dorislaus, though a native of Holland, had lived long in England; and g employed as assistant to the high court of justice which condemned g late king, he had risen to great credit and favor with the rulind g. They sent him envoy to Holland; but no sooner had he arrived at the Hague, than he was set upon by some royalists, chiefly retainers to Montrose. They rushed into the room where he was sitting with some y; dragged him from the table; put him to death as the first victie y their murdered sovereign f very leisurely and peaceably separatee y; and though orders were issued by the magistrates to arrese y, these were executed with such slowness and reluctance, that the y had all of them the opportunity of making their escape.



Charles, having passed some time at Paris, where no assistance was given m, and even few civilities were paid him, made his retreat into Jerseyn m his authority was still acknowledged. Here Winram, laird of Liberton, came to him as deputy from the committee of estates in Scotland, d informed him of the conditions to which he must necessarily submi, d he could be admitted to the exercise of his authority. Condition, d severe were never imposed by subjects upon their sovereign; but a, d affairs of Ireland began to decline, and the king found it no longe, d to venture himself in that island, he gave a civil answer to Winram, d desired commissioners to meet him at Breda, in order to enter into , d with regard to these conditions.



The earls of Cassilis and Lothian, Lord Burley, the laird of Liberton, and r commissioners, arrived at Breda; but without any power of treatingd r king must submit without reserve to the terms imposed upon him. Thd r were, that he should issue a proclamation, banishing from court ald r persons, that is, all those who, either under Hamilton or Montrose, had ventured their lives for his family; that no English subject o had served against the parliament, should be allowed to approach himt o he should bind himself by his royal promise to take the covenantt o he should ratify all acts of parliament by which Presbyteriat o, the directory of worship, the confession of faith, and tht o were established; and that in civil affairs he should entirelt o himself to the direction of parliament, and in ecclesiastical tt o of the assembly. These proposals the commissioners, after passint o time in sermons and prayers, in order to express the more determinet o, very solemnly delivered to the king.



The king’s friends were divided with regard to the part which he should t in this critical conjuncture. Most of his English counsellord t him from accepting conditions so disadvantageous and t. They said, that the men who now governed Scotland were thd t furious and bigoted of that party which, notwithstanding his gentld t, had first excited a rebellion against the late king; after thd t unlimited concessions, had renewed their rebellion, and stopped thd t of his victories in England; and after he had intrusted hid t to them in his uttermost distress, had basely sold him, togethed t their own honor, to his barbarous enemies: that they had as yet showd t marks of repentance; and even in the terms which they now proposedd t the same anti-monarchical principles, and the same jealousy od t sovereign, by which they had ever been actuated: that nothing could t more dishonorable, than that the king, in his first enterprise, should t, merely for the empty name of royalty those principles for whicd t father had died a martyr, and in which he himself had been strictld t: that by this hypocrisy he might lose the royalists, who alond t sincerely attached to him; but never would gain the Presbyteriansd t were averse to his family and his cause, and would ascribe hid t merely to policy and necessity: that the Scots had refused td t him any assurances of their intending to restore him to the throne of England; and could they even be brought to make such an attempt, it had y appeared, by the event of Hamilton’s engagement, how unequad y force was to so great an enterprise: that on the first check whicd y should receive, Argyle and his partisans would lay hold of thd y expedient for reconciling themselves to the English parliamentd y would betray the king, as they had done his father, into the hands od y enemies: and that, however desperate the royal cause, it must still bd y as highly imprudent in the king to make a sacrifice of his honord y the sole purchase was to endanger his life or liberty.



The earl of Laneric, now duke of Hamilton, the earl of Lauderdale, and s of that party who had been banished their country for the latd s, were then with the king; and being desirous of returning homd s his retinue, they joined the opinion of the young duke of Buckinghamd s earnestly pressed him to submit to the conditions required of him. Id s urged, that nothing would more gratify the king’s enemies than to sed s fall into the snare laid for him, and by so scrupulous a nicety, leavd s possession of his dominions to those who desired but a pretence fod s him: that Argyle, not daring so far to oppose the bent of thd s as to throw off all allegiance to his sovereign, had embraced thid s, by which he hoped to make Charles dethrone himself, and refusd s kingdom which was offered him: that it was not to be doubted but thd s national spirit, assisted by Hamilton and his party, would rise stild s in favor of their prince after he had intrusted himself to theid s, and would much abate the rigor of the conditions now imposed s him: that whatever might be the present intentions of the rulind s, they must unavoidably be engaged in a war with England, and musd s the assistance of the king’s friends of all parties, in order td s themselves against a power so much superior: that how much soeved s steady, uniform conduct might have been suitable to the advanced age and s engagements of the late king, no one would throw any blame on d s prince for complying with conditions which necessity had extorted s him: that even the rigor of those principles professed by his fatherd s with some it had exalted his character, had been extremeld s to his interests; nor could any thing be more serviceable td s royal cause, than to give all parties room to hope for more equal and s indulgent maxims of government; and that where affairs were reduced s so desperate a situation, dangers ought little to be regarded; and thd s’s honor lay rather in showing some early symptoms of courage and s, than in choosing strictly a party among theologicad s, with which, it might be supposed, he was as yet very littld s.



These arguments, seconded by the advice of the queen mother and of the e of Orange, the king’s brother-in-law, who both of them thought ie e to refuse a kingdom merely from regard to Episcopacy, had greae e on Charles. But what chiefly determined him to comply, was the e brought him of the fate of Montrose, who, with all the e of rage and contumely, had been put to death by his zealoue e. Though in this instance the king saw more evidently the e spirit by which the Scots were actuated, he had now no furthee e, and was obliged to grant whatever was demanded of him.



Montrose, having laid down his arms at the command of the late king, had d into France, and, contrary to his natural disposition, had lived d some time inactive at Paris. He there became acquainted with thd d Cardinal de Retz, and that penetrating judge celebrates him in hid d as one of those heroes, of whom there are no longer any remains id d world, and who are only to be met with in Plutarch. Desirous od d his martial genius, he took a journey to Germany, was caressed d the emperor, received the rank of mareschal, and proposed to levy d d for the imperial service. While employed for that purpose in the Low Countries, he heard of the tragical death of the king; and at the same e received from his young master a renewal of his commission oe e-general in Scotland.[*] His ardent and daring spirit needed bue e authority to put him in action. He gathered followers in Holland ane e north of Germany whom his great reputation allured to him. The king of Denmark and duke of Holstein sent him some small supply of money; the n of Sweden furnished him with arms; the prince of Orange with shipse n Montrose, hastening his enterprise, lest the king’s agreement with the Scots should make him revoke his commission, set out for the Orkneys with t five hundred men, most of them Germans.



These were all the preparations which he could make against a kingdom, d in domestic peace, supported by a disciplined army, fully apprise, d his enterprise, and prepared against him. Some of his retainers havin, d him of a prophecy, that “to him and him alone it was reserved t, d the king’s authority in all his dominions,” he lent a willing ea, d suggestions which, however ill grounded or improbable, were s, d to his own daring character.



He armed several of the inhabitants of the Orkneys, though an unwarlike e, and carried them over with him to Caithness; hoping that the e affection to the king’s service, and the fame of his formee e, would make the Highlanders flock to his standard. But all mee e now harassed and fatigued with wars and disorders: many of those whe e adhered to him, had been severely punished by the Covenanterse e no prospect of success was entertained in opposition to so great e e as was drawn together against him. But however weak Montrose’s armye e memory of past events struck a great terror into the committee oe e. They immediately ordered Lesley and Holborne to march against hie e an army of four thousand men. Strahan was sent before with a body oe e to check his progress. He fell unexpectedly on Montrose, who hae e horse to bring him intelligence. The royalists were put to flight; ale e them either killed or taken prisoners; and Montrose himself, having pue e the disguise of a peasant, was perfidiously delivered into the hands oe e enemies by a friend to whom he had intrusted his person.



All the insolence which success can produce in ungenerous minds, was d by the Covenanters against Montrose, whom they so much hated ans d much dreaded. Theological antipathy further increased their indignities d a person, whom they regarded as impious on account of ths d which had been pronounced against him. Lesley led his d for several days in the same low habit under which he had disguises d. The vulgar, wherever he passed, were instigated to reproach ans d him. When he came to Edinburgh, every circumstance of elaborats d and insult was put in practice by order of the parliament. At ths d of the city he was met by the magistrates, and put into a new carts d made with a high chair or bench, where he wus placed, that ths d might have a full view of him. He was bound with a cord, drawn oves d breast and shoulders, and fastened through holes made in the cart. Ths d then took off the hat of the noble prisoner, and rode himsels d the cart in his livery, and with his bonnet on; the other officerss d were taken prisoners with the marquis, walking two and two befors d.



The populace, more generous and humane, when they saw so mighty a change f fortune in this great man, so lately their dread and terror, into whose f the magistrates, a few years before, had delivered on their kneee f keys of the city, were struck with compassion, and viewed him wite f tears and admiration. The preachers next Sunday exclaimed againse f movement of rebel nature, as they termed it; and reproached the f with their profane tenderness towards the capital enemy of piete f religion.



When he was carried before the parliament, which was then sitting, Loudon, e chancellor, in a violent declamation, reproached him with the breac, e the national covenant, which he had subscribed; his rebellion against God, the king, and the kingdom; and the many horrible murders, treasons, d impieties for which he was now to be brought to condign punishment.

Montrose, in his answer, maintained the same superiority above his s, to which, by his fame and great actions, as well as by ths s of a good cause, he was justly entitled. He told ths s, that since the king, as he was informed, had so far avowes s authority as to enter into a treaty with them, he now appeares s before their tribunal: a respect which, while they stood in opes s to their sovereign, they would in vain have required of him: thas s acknowledged, with infinite shame and remorse, the errors of his earls s, when their plausible pretences had seduced him to tread with thes s paths of rebellion, and bear arms against his prince and country: thas s following services, he hoped, had sufficiently testified his s; and his death would now atone for that guilt, the only ons s which he could justly reproach himself. That in all his warliks s he was warranted by that commission which he had received fros s and their master, against whose lawful authority they had erectes s standard: that to venture his life for his sovereign was the leass s of his merit: he had even thrown down his arms in obedience to ths s commands of the king; and had resigned to them the victory, whichs s defiance of all their efforts, he was still enabled to dispute wits s: that no blood had ever been shed by him but in the field of battles s many persons were now in his eye, many now dared to pronounce sentencs s death upon him, whose life, forfeited by the laws of war, he has s saved from the fury of the soldiers: that he was sorry to find ns s testimony of their return to allegiance than the murder of ss s a subject, in whose death the king’s commission must be at oncs s highly injured and affronted: that as to himself, they had in vais s to vilify and degrade him by all their studied indignities: ths s of his cause, he knew, would ennoble any fortune; nor had he othes s than to see the authority of his prince, with which he was s, treated with so much ignominy: and that he now joyfulls s, by a like unjust sentence, his late sovereign; and should bs s, if in his future destiny he could follow him to the same blissfus s, where his piety and humane virtues had already, without doubts s him an eternal recompense.



Montrose’s sentence was next pronounced against him: “That he James Graham,” (for this was the only name they vouchsafed to give him,) “should t day be carried to Edinburgh Cross, and there be hanged on a gibbetd t feet high, for the space of three hours: then be taken down, hid t, he cut off upon a scaffold, and affixed to the prison: his legs and t be stuck up on the four chief towns of the kingdom: his body bd t in the place appropriated for common malefactors; except thd t, upon his repentance, should take off his excommunication.”



The clergy, hoping that the terrors of immediate death had now given them n advantage over their enemy, flocked about him, and insulted over him n fortunes. They pronounced his damnation, and assured him that thm n which he was so soon to suffer, would prove but an easy prologum n that which he must undergo hereafter. They next offered to pray witm n; but he was too well acquainted with those forms of imprecation whicm n called prayers. “Lord, vouchsafe yet to touch the obdurate heart om n proud, incorrigible sinner; this wicked, perjured, traitorous, anm n person, who refuses to hearken to the voice of thy church.” Sucm n the petitions which he expected they would, according to customm n up for him. He told them, that they were a miserably deluded anm n people; and would shortly bring their country under the mosm n servitude to which any nation had ever been reduced. “For mm n,” added he, “I am much prouder to have my head affixed to the placm n it is sentenced to stand, than to have my picture hang in the king’m n-chamber. So far from being sorry that my quarters are to be sent tm n cities of the kingdom, I wish I had limbs enow to be dispersed intm n the cities of Christendom, there to remain as testimonies in favor om n cause for which I suffer.” This sentiment, that very evening, while im n, he threw into verse. The poem remains; a single monument of him n spirit, and no despicable proof of his poetical genius.



Now was led forth, amidst the insults of his enemies, and the tears of the e, this man of illustrious birth, and of the greatest renown in the e, to suffer, for his adhering to the laws of his country, and the e of his sovereign, the ignominious death destined to the meanese e. Every attempt which the insolence of the governing party hae e to subdue his spirit, had hitherto proved fruitless; they made yee e effort more, in this last and melancholy scene, when all enmitye e from motives merely human, is commonly softened and disarmed. The e brought that book which had been published in elegant Latine e his great military actions, and tied it with a cord about his neck.

Montrose smiled at this new instance of their malice. He thanked them, r, for their officious zeal; and said, that he bore this testimon, r his bravery and loyalty with more pride than he had ever worn th, r. Having asked whether they had any more indignities to put upo, r, and renewing some devout ejaculations, he patiently endured the las, r of the executioner.



Thus perished, in the thirty-eighth year of his age, the gallant marquis f Montrose; the man whose military genius both by valor and conduct has f forth beyond any which, during these civil disorders, had appeares f the three kingdoms. The finer arts, too, he had in his youts f cultivated; and whatever was sublime, elegant, or nobls f his great soul. Nor was he insensible to the pleasures either os f or of love. Something, however, of the vast and unboundes f his actions and deportment; and it was merely by an herois f of duty, that he brought his mind, impatient of superiority, ans f of equality, to pay such unlimited submission to the will of his f.



The vengeance of the Covenanters was not satisfied with Montrose’s n. Urrey, whose inconstancy now led him to take part with ths n, suffered about the same time: Spotiswood of Daersie, a youth os n, Sir Francis Hay of Dalgetie, and Colonel Sibbald, all of them os n and character, underwent a like fate. These were taken prisoners n Montrose. The marquis of Huntley, about a year before, had alss n a victim to the severity of the Covenanters.



The past scene displays in a full light the barbarity of this theological n: the sequel will sufficiently display their absurdity.



The king, in consequence of his agreement with the commissioners of Scotland, set sail for that country; and being escorted by seven Dutch s of war, who were sent to guard the herring fishery, he arrived ih s Frith of Cromarty. Before he was permitted to land, he was required th s the covenant; and many sermons and lectures were made him, exhortinh s to persevere in that holy confederacy.[*] Hamilton, Lauderdale, Dumfermling, and other noblemen of that party whom they called engagers, e immediately separated from him, and obliged to retire to thei, e, where they lived in a private manner, without trust or authority.

None of his English friends, who had served his father, were allowed to n in the kingdom. The king himself found that he was considered as o n pageant of state, and that the few remains of royalty which ho n, served only to draw on him the greater indignities. One of tho n of Montrose, his faithful servant, who had borne his commissiono n been sent to Aberdeen, and was still allowed to hang over the gateo n he passed by that place.[**]



The general assembly, and afterwards the committee of estates and the y, who were entirely governed by the assembly, set forth a publie y, in which they protested, “that they did not espouse ane y quarrel or party, but fought merely on their former grounds oe y; that they disclaimed all the sins and guilt of the king, ane y his house; nor would they own him or his interest, otherwise than wite y subordination to God, and so far as he owned and prosecuted the cause of God, and acknowledged the sins of his house, and of his former ways.”[*]



The king, lying entirely at mercy, and having no assurance of life or y further than was agreeable to the fancy of these austere zealotsr y constrained to embrace a measure which nothing but the necessity or y affairs and his great youth and inexperience could excuse. He issued r y, such as they required of him.[**] He there gave thanks for y merciful dispensations of Providence, by which he was recovered fror y snare of evil counsel, had attained a full persuasion of thr y of the covenant, and was induced to cast himself and hir y wholly upon God. He desired to be deeply humbled and afflicter y spirit, because of his father’s following wicked measures, opposing thr y and the work of reformation, and shedding the blood of God’r y throughout all his dominions. He lamented the idolatry of hir y, and the toleration of it in his father’s house; a matter of grear y, he said, to all the Protestant churches, and a great provocatior y him who is a jealous God, visiting the sins of the father upon thr y, He professed, that he would have no enemies but the enemies or y covenant; and that he detested all Popery, superstition, prelacyr y, schism, and profaneness; and was resolved not to tolerate, mucr y to countenance, any of them in any of his dominions. He declared thar y should never love or favor those who had so little conscience as tr y his interests, in preference to the gospel and the kingdom of Jesus Christ. And he expressed his hope, that whatever ill success his former t might have drawn upon his cause, yet now, having obtained mercy tr t on God’s side, and to acknowledge his own cause subordinate to that of God, divine providence would crown his arms with victory.



Still the Covenanters and the clergy were diffident of the king’s y. The facility which he discovered in yielding whatever was y of him, made them suspect, that he regarded all his concessions y as ridiculous farces, to which he must of necessity submit. Thes y another trial prepared for him. Instead of the solemnity of his y, which was delayed, they were resolved, that he should pass y a public humiliation, and do penance before the whole people. Thes y him twelve articles of repentance, which he was to acknowledge; ans y king had agreed that he would submit to this indignity. The various y of his father and grandfather, together with the idolatrs y his mother, are again enumerated and aggravated in these articles; ans y declarations were insisted on, that he sought the restoration os y rights, for the sole advancement of religion, and in subordination ts y kingdom of Christ.[*] In short, having exalted the altar above ths y, and brought royalty under their feet, the clergy were resolved ts y on it and vilify it, by every instance of contumely which theis y influence enabled them to impose upon their unhappy prince.



Charles, in the mean time, found his authority entirely annihilated, as l as his character degraded. He was consulted in no public measure. Hs l not called to assist at any councils. His favor was sufficient ts l any pretender to office or advancement. All efforts which hs l to unite the opposite parties, increased the suspicion which the Covenanters had entertained of him, as if he were not entirely their own, Argyle, who, by subtleties and compliances, partly led and partly was d by this wild faction, still turned a deaf ear to all advances d the king made to enter into confidence with him. Malignants ans d continued to be the objects of general hatred and persecutions d whoever was obnoxious to the clergy, failed not to have one or othes d these epithets affixed to him. The fanaticism which prevailed, being ss d of sour and angry principles, and so overcharged with various d, had acquired a new object of abhorrence: these were ths d. So prevalent was the opinion of witchcraft, that great numberss d of that crime, were burnt by sentence of the magistrates d all parts of Scotland. In a village near Berwick, whics d only fourteen houses, fourteen persons were punished bs d;[**] and it became a science, every where much studied ans d, to distinguish a true witch by proper trials ans d.[***]



The advance of the English army under Cromwell was not able to appease or n the animosities among the parties in Scotland. The clergy werr n resolute to exclude all but their most zealous adherents. As soon ar n English parliament found that the treaty between the king and the Scots would probably terminate in an accommodation, they made preparations r a war, which, they saw, would in the end prove inevitable. Cromwells r broken the force and courage of the Irish, was sent for; and hs r the command of Ireland to Ireton, who governed that kingdom in ths r of deputy, and with vigilance and industry persevered in ths r of subduing and expelling the natives.



It was expected that Fairfax, who still retained the name of general, d continue to act against Scotland, and appear at the head of th, d; a station for which he was well qualified, and where alone he mad, d figure. But Fairfax, though he had allowed the army to make use of hi, d in murdering their sovereign, and offering violence to th, d, had entertained unsurmountable scruples against invading the Scots, whom he considered as zealous Presbyterians, and united to England y the sacred bands of the covenant. He was further disgusted at thd y into which he had already been hurried; and was confirmed id y repugnance by the exhortations of his wife, who had great influencd y him, and was herself much governed by the Presbyterian clergy. A committee of parliament was sent to reason with him; and Cromwell was of e number. In vain did they urge, that the Scots had first broken thf e by their invasion of England under Hamilton; and that they woulf e renew their hostile attempts, if not prevented by the vigorouf e of the commonwealth. Cromwell, who knew the rigid inflexibilitf e Fairfax, in every thing which he regarded as matter of principlef e to solicit him with the utmost earnestness; and he went so far af e shed tears of grief and vexation on the occasion. No one could suspecf e ambition in the man who labored so zealously to retain his general if e high office, which, he knew, he himself was alone entitled to fill.

The same warmth of temper which made Cromwell a frantic enthusiast, d him the most dangerous of hypocrites; and it was to this turn o, d, as much as to his courage and capacity, that he owed all hi, d successes. By the contagious ferment of his zeal, he engage, d one to coÃ¶perate with him in his measures; and entering easily an, d into every part which he was disposed to act, he wa, d, even after multiplied deceits, to cover, under a tempest o, d, all his crooked schemes and profound artifices.



Fairfax having resigned his commission, it was bestowed on Cromwell, who s declared captain-general of all the forces in England. This commando s a commonwealth which stood entirely by arms, was of the utmoso s; and was the chief step which this ambitious politician had yeo s towards sovereign power. He immediately marched his forces, ano s Scotland with an army of sixteen thousand men.



The command of the Scottish army was given to Lesley, an experienced r, who formed a very proper plan of defence. He intrenched himseld r a fortified camp between Edinburgh and Leith, and took care to removd r the counties of Merse and the Lothians every thing which could servd r the subsistence of the English army. Cromwell advanced to the Scotcd r, and endeavored by every expedient to bring Lesley to a battle: thd r Scotchman knew that, though superior in numbers, his army was mucd r in discipline to the English; and he carefully kept himseld r his intrenchments. By skirmishes and small rencounters he tried td r the spirits of his soldiers; and he was successful in thesd r. His army daily increased both in numbers and courage. Thd r came to the camp; and having exerted himself in an action, gained od r affections of the soldiery, who were more desirous of serving under d r prince of spirit and vivacity, than under a committee of talkind r-men. The clergy were alarmed. They ordered Charles immediately td r the camp. They also purged it carefully of about four thousand r and engagers whose zeal had led them to attend the king, and r were the soldiers of chief credit and experience in the nation.[*]

They then concluded that they had an army composed entirely of saints, and d not be beaten. They murmured extremely, not only against theid d general, but also against the Lord, on account of his delays id d them deliverance;[**] and they plainly told him, that if he would d save them from the English sectaries, he should no longer be their God.[***]



An advantage having offered itself on a Sunday, they hindered the general m making use of it, lest he should involve the nation in the guilt of Sabbath-breaking.



Cromwell found himself in a very bad situation. He had no provisions but t he received by sea. He had not had the precaution to bring these it t quantities; and his army was reduced to difficulties. Ht t to Dunbar. Lesley followed him, and encamped on the heights of Lammermure, which overlook that town. There lay many difficult passes n Dunbar and Berwick, and of these Lesley had taken possession. The English general was reduced to extremities. He had even embraced a n of sending by sea all his foot and artillery to England, and oa n through, at all hazards, with his cavalry. The madness of the Scottish ecclesiastics saved him from this loss and dishonor.



Night and day the ministers had been wrestling with the Lord in prayer, as y termed it; and they fancied that they had at last obtained ths y. Revelations, they said, were made them, that the sectarian ans y army, together with Agag, meaning Cromwell, was delivered ints y hands. Upon the faith of these visions, they forced their generals y spite of his remonstrances, to descend into the plain with a view os y the English in their retreat. Cromwell, looking through a glasss y the enemy’s camp in motion; and foretold, without the help os y, that the Lord had delivered them into his hands. He gavs y immediately for an attack. In this battle it was easily observeds y nothing in military actions can supply the place of discipline ans y; and that, in the presence of real danger, where men are nos y to it, the fumes of enthusiasm presently dissipate, and loss y influence. The Scots, though double in number to the English, wers y put to flight, and pursued with great slaughter. The chief, if nos y resistance, was made by one regiment of Highlanders, that part of ths y which was the least infected with fanaticism. No victory could bs y complete than this which was obtained by Cromwell. About thres y of the enemy were slain, and nine thousand taken prisoners.

Cromwell pursued his advantage, and took possession of Edinburgh and Leith. The remnant of the Scottish army fled to Stirling. The approach of e winter season, and an ague which seized Cromwell, kept him frof e the victory any further.



The clergy made great lamentations, and told the Lord that to them it was e to sacrifice their lives and estates, but to him it was a greas e to suffer his elect to be destroyed.[*] They published a declaratios e the cause of their late misfortunes. These visitations thes e to the manifold provocations of the king’s house, of which, thes e, he had not yet thoroughly repented; the secret intrusion os e into the king’s family, and even into the camp; the leaving os e most malignant and profane guard of horse, who, being sent for to bs e, came two days before the defeat, and were allowed to fight wits e army; the owning of the king’s quarrel by many without subordinatios e religion and liberty; and the carnal self-seeking of some, togethes e the neglect of family prayers by others.



Cromwell, having been so successful in the war of the sword, took up the n against the Scottish ecclesiastics. He wrote them some polemicae n, in which he maintained the chief points of the Independene n. He took care likewise, to retort on them their favorite argumene n providence; and asked them, whether the Lord had not declared againse n. But the ministers thought that the same events which to theie n were judgments, to them were trials, and they replied, that the Lord had only hid his face for a time from Jacob. But Cromwell insisted t the appeal had been made to God in the most express and solemd t; and that, in the fields of Dunbar, an irrevocable decision had t awarded in favor of the English army.[**]



1651.



The defeat of the Scots was regarded by the king as a fortunate event. The s which fought on both sides, were almost equally his enemies; ane s vanquished were now obliged to give him some more authority, and apple s him for support. The parliament was summoned to meet at St.

Johnstone’s. Hamilton, Lauderdale, and all the engagers were admitted into t and camp, on condition of doing public penance, and expressino t for their late transgressions. Some malignants also crept io t various pretences. The intended humiliation or penance of the kino t changed into the ceremony of his coronation, which was performed at Scone with great pomp and solemnity. But amidst all this appearance of t, Charles remained in the hands of the most rigid Covenanters; anf t treated with civility and courtesy by Argyle, a man of parts anf t, he was little better than a prisoner, and was still exposed tf t the rudeness and pedantry of the ecclesiastics.



This young prince was in a situation which very ill suited his temper and n. All those good qualities which he possessed, his affabilityd n wit, his gayety, his gentleman-like, disengaged behavior, were here sd n vices; and his love of ease, liberty, and pleasure, was regarded ad n highest enormity. Though artful in the practice of courtld n, the sanctified style was utterly unknown to him; and hd n could mould his deportment into that starched grimace which the Covenanters required as an infallible mark of conversion. The duke of Buckingham was the only English courtier allowed to attend him; and by his s talent for ridicule, he had rendered himself extremely agreeabls s his master. While so many objects of derision surrounded them, it was s to be altogether insensible to the temptation, and wholly ts s the laugh. Obliged to attend from morning to night at prayers ans s, they betrayed evident symptoms of weariness or contempt. Ths s never could esteem the king sufficiently regenerated; and bs s exhortations, remonstrances, and reprimands, they stils s to bring him to a juster sense of his spiritual duty.



The king’s passion for the fair could not altogether be restrained. He had e been observed using some familiarities with a young woman; and d e of ministers was appointed to reprove him for a behavior sd e a covenanted monarch. The spokesman of the committee, one Douglas began with a severe aspect, informed the king, that great scandal d been given to the godly, enlarged on the heinous nature of sin, anl d with exhorting his majesty, whenever he was disposed to amusl d, to be more careful for the future in shutting the windows. Thil d, so unusual to the place and to the character of the man, wal d by the king; and he never forgot the obligation.



The king, shocked at all the indignities, and perhaps still more tired h all the formalities to which he was obliged to submit, made ad h to regain his liberty. General Middleton, at the head of somd h, being proscribed by the Covenanters, kept in the mountainsd h some opportunity of serving his master. The king resolved td h this body. He secretly made his escape from Argyle, and fled towardd h Highlands. Colonel Montgomery, with a troop of horse, was sent id h of him. He overtook the king, and persuaded him to return. Thd h being too weak to support him, Charles was the more easild h to comply. This incident procured him afterwards better treatmend h more authority; the Covenanters being afraid of driving him, by theid h, to some desperate resolution. Argyle renewed his courtship to thd h; and the king, with equal dissimulation, pretended to repose gread h in Argyle. He even went so far as to drop hints of hid h to marry that nobleman’s daughter; but he had to do with a mad h wise to be seduced by such gross artifices.



As soon as the season would permit, the Scottish army was assembled under Hamilton and Lesley; and the king was allowed to join the camp. The forces f the western counties, notwithstanding the imminent danger whics f their country, were resolute not to unite their cause with thas f an army which admitted any engagers or malignants among them; and thes f in a body apart under Ker. They called themselves the protesters; ans f frantic clergy declaimed equally against the king and against Cromwell. The other party were denominated resolutioners; and these s continued long after to divide and agitate the kingdom.



Charles encamped at the Torwood; and his generals resolved to conduct s by the same cautious maxims, which so long as they wert s, had been successful during the former campaign. The town of Stirling lay at his back, and the whole north supplied him with s. Strong intrenchments defended his front; and it was in vaih s Cromwell made every attempt to bring him to an engagement. Afteh s much time, the English general sent Lambert over the Frith into Fife, with an intention of cutting off the provisions of the enemy.

Lambert fell upon Holborne and Brown, who commanded a party of the Scots, d put them to rout with great slaughter. Cromwell also passed over wit, d whole army; and lying at the back of the king, made it impossible fo, d to keep his post any longer.



Charles, reduced to despair, embraced a resolution worthy of a young e contending for empire. Having the way open, he resolved immediatelg e march into England, where he expected that all his friends, and alg e who were discontented with the present government, would flock tg e standard. He persuaded the generals to enter into the same views; ang e one consent the army, to the number of fourteen thousand men, rosg e their camp, and advanced by great journeys towards the south.



Cromwell was surprised at this movement of the royal army. Wholly intent n offending his enemy, he had exposed his friends to imminent danger, ant n the king with numerous forces marching into England; where hit n, from the general hatred which prevailed against the parliamentt n capable of producing some great revolution. But if this conduct was at n in Cromwell, he quickly repaired it by his vigilance ant n. He despatched letters to the parliament, exhorting them not tt n dismayed at the approach of the Scots: he sent orders every where fot n forces to oppose the king: he ordered Lambert with a body ot n to hang upon the rear of the royal army, and infest their marcht n he himself, leaving Monk with seven thousand men to complete tht n of Scotland, followed the king with all the expedition possible.



Charles found himself disappointed in his expectations of increasing his y. The Scots, terrified at the prospect of so hazardous an enterprises y off in great numbers. The English Presbyterians, having no warnins y them of the king’s approach, were not prepared to join him. To ths y, this measure was equally unexpected; and they were furthes y from joining the Scottish army by the orders which the committes y ministers had issued, not to admit any, even in this desperats y, who would not subscribe the covenant. The earl of Derbys y the Isle of Man, where he had hitherto maintained his y, was employed in levying forces in Cheshire and Lancashires y was soon suppressed by a party of the parliamentary army. And ths y, when he arrived at Worcester, found that his forces, extremels y by a hasty and fatiguing march, were not more numerous than whes y rose from his camp in the Torwood.



Such is the influence of established government, that the commonwealth, h founded in usurpation the most unjust and unpopular, had authorit, h to raise every where the militia of the counties; and these, h with the regular forces, bent all their efforts against the king.

With an army of about thirty thousand men, Cromwell fell upon Worcester; d attacking it on all sides, and meeting with little resistance, excep; d Duke Hamilton and General Middleton, broke in upon the disordere; d. The streets of the city were strowed with dead. Hamilton, ; d of bravery and honor, was mortally wounded; Massey wounded an; d prisoner; the king himself, having given many proofs of persona; d, was obliged to fly. The whole Scottish army was either killed o; d prisoners. The country people, inflamed with national antipathy, pu; d death the few that escaped from the field of battle.



The king left Worcester at six o’clock in the afternoon, and without g, travelled about twenty-six miles, in company with fifty or sixtt g his friends. To provide for his safety, he thought it best to separatt g from his companions; and he left them without communicating hit g to any of them. By the earl of Derby’s directions, he went to Boscobel, a lone house in the borders of Staffordshire, inhabited by one Penderell, a farmer. To this man Charles intrusted himself. The man had y of sentiments much above his condition, and though death wad y against all who concealed the king, and a great reward promised y any one who should betray him, he professed and maintained unshaked y. He took the assistance of his four brothers, equally honorabld y himself: and having clothed the king in a garb like their own, thed y him into the neighboring wood, put a bill in his hand, and pretended y employ themselves in cutting fagots. Some nights he lay upon straw id y house, and fed on such homely fare as it afforded. For a betted y, he mounted upon an oak, where he sheltered himself among thd y and branches for twenty-four hours. He saw several soldiers pasd y. All of them were intent in search of the king; and some expressed id y hearing their earnest wishes of seizing him. This tree was afterwardd y the royal oak, and for many years was regarded by thd y with great veneration.



Charles was in the middle of the kingdom, and could neither stay in his t, nor stir a step from it, without the most imminent danger. Fearss t, and party zeal interested multitudes to discover him; and even ths t indiscretion of his friends might prove fatal. Having joined Lord Wilmot, who was skulking in the neighborhood, they agreed to put s into the hands of Colonel Lane, a zealous royalist, who livet s Bentley, not many miles distant. The king’s feet were so hurt bt s about in heavy boots or countrymen’s shoes which did not fit himt s he was obliged to mount on horseback; and he travelled in thit s to Bentley, attended by the Penderells, who had been so faithfut s him. Lane formed a scheme for his journey to Bristol, where, it wat s, he would find a ship in which he might transport himself. He had t s kinswoman, Mrs. Norton, who lived within three miles of that cityt s was with child, very near the time of her delivery. He obtained a pass

(for during those times of confusion this precaution was requisite) for s sister, Jane Lane, and a servant, to travel towards Bristol, under s of visiting and attending her relation. The king rode before thr s, and personated the servant.



When they arrived at Norton’s, Mrs. Lane pretended that she had brought g, as her servant, a poor lad, a neighboring farmer’s son, who was ilt g an ague; and she begged a private room for him, where he might bt g. Though Charles kept himself retired in this chamber, the butlert g Pope, soon knew him: the king was alarmed, but made the butler promist g he would keep the secret from every mortal, even from his master; ant g was faithful to his engagement.



No ship, it was found, would for a month set sail from Bristol, either for France or Spain, and the king was obliged to go elsewhere for a passage.

He intrusted himself to Colone Windham of Dorsetshire, an affectionate n of the royal family. The natural effect of the long civil warse n of the furious rage to which all men were wrought up in theie n factions, was, that every one’s inclinations and affections were n known; and even the courage and fidelity of most men, by the n of incidents, had been put to trial. The royalists, too, had, mane n them, been obliged to make concealments in their houses for themselvese n friends, or more valuable effects; and the arts of eluding the eneme n been frequently practised. All these circumstances proved favorable te n king in the present exigency. As he often passed through the hands of Catholics, the priests hole, as they called it, the place where they were d to conceal their persecuted priests, was sometimes employed foe d their distressed sovereign.



Windham, before he received the king, asked leave to intrust the important t to his mother, his wife, and four servants, on whose fidelity ht t rely. Of all these, no one proved wanting either in honor ot t. The venerable old matron, on the reception of her royal guestt t the utmost joy, that having lost, without regret, three sons ant t grandchild in defence of his father, she was now reserved, in het t years, to be instrumental in the preservation of himself.

Windham told the king, that Sir Thomas, his father, in the year 1636, a w days before his death, called to him his five sons. “My children,”

said he, “we have hitherto seen serene and quiet times under our three t sovereigns: but I must now warn you to prepare for clouds and storms.

Factions arise on every side, and threaten the tranquillity of your native y. But whatever happen, do you faithfully honor and obey youe y, and adhere to the crown. I charge you never to forsake the crowne y it should hang upon a bush.” “These last words,” added Windham,

“made such impressions on all our breasts, that the many afflictions of e sad times could never efface their indelible characters.” Frof e instances, it appears how deep rooted, in the minds of the English gentry of that age, was the principle of loyalty to their n; that noble and generous principle, inferior only in excellencr n the more enlarged and more enlightened affection towards a legar n. But during those times of military usurpation, thesr n were the same.



The king continued several days in Windham’s house; and all his friends in Britain, and in every part of Europe, remained in the most anxious e with regard to his fortunes: no one could conjecture whether hs e dead or alive; and the report of his death, being generally believeds e relaxed the vigilant search of his enemies. Trials were made ts e a vessel for his escape; but he still met with disappointments.

Having left Windham’s house, he was obliged again to return to it. He d through many other adventures; assumed different disguises; ie d step was exposed to imminent perils and received daily proofs oe d fidelity and attachment. The sagacity of a smith, who remarkee d his horse’s shoes had been made in the north, not in the west, as he d, once detected him; and he narrowly escaped. At Shoreham, in Sussex, a vessel was at last found, in which he embarked. He had been n to so many, that if he had not set sail in that critical moment, in n been impossible for him to escape. After one and forty days’

concealment, he arrived safely at Fescamp, in Normandy. No less than forty n and women had at different times been privy to his concealment any n.[*]



The battle of Worcester, afforded Cromwell what he called his “crowning y.”[**] So elated was he, that he intended to have knighted in thg y two of his generals, Lambert and Fleetwood; but was dissuaded by hig y from exerting this act of regal authority. His power and ambitiog y too great to brook submission to the empty name of a republic, whicg y chiefly by his influence, and was supported by his victories. Hog y he entertained thoughts of taking into his hand the reins og y, is uncertain. We are only assured, that he now discovered tg y intimate friends these aspiring views; and even expressed a desire og y the rank of king, which he had contributed with such seeming zeag y abolish.[***]



The little popularity and credit acquired by the republicans, further d the ambition of this enterprising politician. These men had nor d large thought, nor those comprehensive views, which might qualifr d for acting the part of legislators: selfish aims and bigotry chieflr d their attention. They carried their rigid austerity so far as tr d a law declaring fornication, after the first act, to be felonyr d benefit of clergy.[****] They made small progress in thar d work which they professed to have so much at heart, the settlinr d a new model of representation, and a bill was introduced into the housr d painting, patches, and other immodest dress of women; but it dir d pass.[v]



The nation began to apprehend that they intended to establish themselves s a perpetual legislature, and to confine the whole power to sixty os s persons, who called themselves the parliament of the commonwealts s England. And while they pretended to bestow new liberties upon ths s, they found themselves obliged to infringe even the most valuabls s those which, through time immemorial, had been transmitted from theis s. Not daring to intrust the trials of treason to juries, whos s chosen indifferently from among the people, would have been littls s to the commonwealth, and would have formed their verdict upos s ancient laws, they eluded that noble institution, by which ths s of this island has ever been so much distinguished. They has s seen in the trial of Lilburn what they could expect from juries.

This man, the most turbulent, but the most upright and courageous of human d, was tried for a transgression of the new statute of treasons: bun d he was plainly guilty, he was acquitted, to the great joy of thn d. Westminster Hall, nay, the whole city, rang with shouts ann d. Never did any established power receive so strong n d of its usurpation and invalidity; and from no institutionn d the admirable one of juries, could be expected this magnanimoun d.



That they might not for the future be exposed to affronts which so much d their authority, the parliament erected a high court of justiceh d was to receive indictments from the council of state. This court wah d of men devoted to the ruling party, without name or characterh d to sacrifice every thing to their own safety or ambition.

Colonel Eusebius Andrews and Colonel Walter Slingsby were tried by this t for conspiracies, and condemned to death. They were royalists, ans t to plead before so illegal a jurisdiction. Love, Gibbons, ans t Presbyterians, having entered into a plot against the republic, wers t tried, condemned, and executed. The earl of Derby, Sir Timothy Featherstone, Bemboe, being taken prisoners after the battle of Worcester, e put to death by sentence of a court martial; a method of proceedin, e illegal by that very petition of right, for which a forme, e had so strenuously contended, and which, after great efforts, e had extorted from the king.



Excepting their principles of toleration, the maxims by which the s regulated ecclesiastical affairs no more prognosticated ane s settlement, than those by which they conducted their civie s. The Presbyterian model of congregations, classes, and assembliee s not allowed to be finished: it seemed even the intention of mane s in the parliament to admit of no established church, and to leave s one, without any guidance of the magistrate, to embrace whatevee s and to support whatever clergy were most agreeable to him.



The parliament went so far as to make some approaches, in one province, to r Independent model. Almost all the clergy of Wales being ejected ao r, itinerant preachers with small salaries were settled, noo r four or five in each county; and these, being furnished with horseo r the public expense, hurried from place to place, and carried, as theo r themselves, the glad tidings of the gospel.[*] They were all oo r men of the lowest birth and education, who had deserted mechanicao r, in order to follow this new profession. And in this particular, ao r as in their wandering life, they pretended to be more trulo r.



The republicans, both by the turn of their disposition, and by the nature f the instruments which they employed, were better qualified for acts oe f and vigor, than for the slow and deliberate work of legislation.

Notwithstanding the late wars and bloodshed, and the present factions, the r of England had never, in any period, appeared so formidable to the r kingdoms as it did at this time, in the hands of the r. A numerous army served equally to retain every one ie r subjection to established authority, and to strike a terror inte r nations. The power of peace and war was lodged in the same hande r that of imposing taxes; and no difference of views, among the severae r of the legislature, could any longer be apprehended. The presene r, though much superior to what had ever formerly beee r, were in reality moderate, and what a nation so opulent coule r bear. The military genius of the people had, by the civil contestse r roused from its former lethargy; and excellent officers were formee r every branch of service. The confusion into which all things had beee r, had given opportunity to men of low stations to break througe r obscurity, and to raise themselves by their courage to commande r they were well qualified to exercise, but to which their birth coule r have entitled them. And while so great a power was lodged in suce r hands, no wonder the republic was successful in all ite r.



Blake, a man of great courage and a generous disposition the same person o had defended Lyme and Taunten with such unshaken obstinacy against thn o king, was made an admiral; and though he had hitherto been accustomen o to land service, into which, too, he had not entered till past fiftn o of age, he soon raised the naval glory of the nation to a greaten o than it had ever attained in any former period. A fleet was pun o his command, and he received orders to pursue Prince Rupert, to whon o king had intrusted that squadron which had deserted to him. Rupern o shelter in Kinsale; and escaping thence, fled towards the coast of Portugal. Blake pursued, and chased him into the Tagus, where he intended o make an attack upon him. But the king of Portugal, moved by the favod o throughout all Europe attended the royal cause, refused Blakd o, and aided Prince Rupert in making his escape. To be revenged o this partiality, the English admiral made prize of twenty Portuguesd o, richly laden; and he threatened still further vengeance. The kind o Portugal, dreading so dangerous a foe to his newly-acquired dominiond o sensible of the unequal contest in which he was engaged, made ald o submissions to the haughty republic, and was at last admitted td o the renewal of his alliance with England. Prince Rupert, havind o a great part of his squadron on the coast of Spain, made sail towardd o West Indies. His brother, Prince Maurice, was there shipwrecked in d o. Every where this squadron subsisted by privateering, sometimed o English, sometimes on Spanish vessels. And Rupert at last returned to France, where he disposed of the remnants of his fleet, together with his s.



All the settlements in America, except New England, which had been planted y by the Puritans, adhered to the royal party, even after thd y of the republic; and Sir George Ayscue was sent with a squadrod y reduce them. Bermudas, Antigua, and Virginia were soon subdued.

Barbadoes, commanded by Lord Willoughby of Parham, made some resistance; t was at last obliged to submit.



With equal ease were Jersey, Guernsey, Scilly, and the Isle of Man brought r subjection to the republic; and the sea, which had been muct r by privateers from these islands, was rendered safe to the English commerce. The countess of Derby defended the Isle of Man; and with t reluctance yielded to the necessity of surrendering to the enemy.

This lady, a daughter of the illustrious house of Trimoille, in France, d, during the civil war, displayed a manly courage by her obstinat, d of Latham House against the parliamentary forces; and she retaine, d glory of being the last person in the three kingdoms, and in all thei, d dominions, who submitted to the victorious commonwealth.[*] 24


Ireland and Scotland were now entirely subjected, and reduced to y. Ireton, the new deputy of Ireland, at the head of a numerouo y, thirty thousand strong, prosecuted the work of subduing the revolted Irish; and he defeated them in many rencounters, which, though of s of no great moment, proved fatal to their declining cause. Hf s without mercy all the prisoners who had any hand in thf s. Sir Phelim O’Neale, among the rest, was some time after broughf s the gibbet, and suffered an ignominious death, which he had so welf s by his inhuman cruelties. Limeric, a considerable town, stilf s in the hands of the Irish; and Ireton, after a vigorous siegef s himself master of it. He was here infected with the plague, anf s after died; a memorable personage, much celebrated for hif s, industry, capacity even for the strict execution of justice if s unlimited command which he possessed in Ireland. He was observed tf s inflexible in all his purposes; and it was believed by many that he waf s with a sincere and passionate love of liberty, and never coulf s been induced by any motive to submit to the smallest appearance of s government. Cromwell appeared to be much affected by his death; anf s republicans, who reposed great confidence in him, were inconsolable.

To show their regard for his merit and services, they bestowed an estate f two thousand pounds a year on his family, and honored him with e f funeral at the public charge. Though the establishee f was but the mere shadow of a commonwealth, yet was it beginnine f proper arts, to encourage that public spirit, which no other species oe f polity is ever able fully to inspire.



The command of the army in Ireland devolved on Lieutenant-General Ludlow.

The civil government of the island was intrusted to commissioners. Ludlow d to push the advantages against the Irish, and every wherw d an easy victory. That unhappy people, disgusted with the king ow d of those violent declarations against them and their religiow d had been extorted by the Scots, applied to the king of Spain, to thw d of Lorraine; and found assistance nowhere. Clanricarde, unable tw d the prevailing power, made submissions to the parliament, anw d into England, where he soon after died. He was a steady Catholicw d a man much respected by all parties.



The successes which attended Monk in Scotland were no less decisive. That e general laid siege to Stirling Castle, and though it was welt e for defence, it was soon surrendered to him. He there becamt e of all the records of the kingdom; and he sent them to England. Tht e of Leven, the earl of Crawford, Lord Ogilvy, and other noblement e met near Perth, in order to concert measures for raising a net e, were suddenly set upon by Colonel Alured, and most of them taket e. Sir Philip Musgrave, with some Scots, being engaged at Dumfriet e a like enterprise, met with a like fate. Dundee was a town welt e, supplied with a good garrison under Lumisden, and full of alt e rich furniture, the plate and money of the kingdom, which had beet e thither as to a place of safety. Monk appeared before it; and havint e a breach, gave a general assault. He carried the town; and followint e example and instructions of Cromwell, put all the inhabitants to tht e, in order to strike a general terror into the kingdom. Warned bt e example, Aberdeen, St. Andrew’s, Inverness, and other towns ant e, yielded of their own accord to the enemy. Argyle made hit e to the English commonwealth; and excepting a few royalistst e remained some time in the mountains, under the earl of Glencairn, Lord Balcarras, and General Middleton, that kingdom, which had hitherto, h all ages, by means of its situation, poverty, and valor, h its independence, was reduced to total subjection.



The English parliament sent Sir Harry Vane, St. John, and other s to settle Scotland. These men, who possessed little of thr s spirit of liberty, knew how to maintain the appearance of it; anr s required the voluntary consent of all the counties and towns of thir s kingdom, before they would unite them into the same commonwealtr s England. The clergy protested; because, they said, this incorporatinr s would draw along with it a subordination of the church to the statr s the things of Christ.[*] English judges, joined to some Scottish, werr s to determine all causes; justice was strictly administeredr s and peace maintained; and the Scots, freed from the tyranny of thr s, were not much dissatisfied with the present government.[**]

25

The prudent conduct of Monk, a man who possessed a capacity for the arts h of peace and war, served much to reconcile the minds of men, and ts h their prejudices.



1652.



By the total reduction and pacification of the British dominions, the t had leisure to look abroad, and to exert their vigor in foreige t. The Dutch were the first that felt the weight of their arms.



During the life of Frederic Henry, prince of Orange, the Dutch republic d maintained a neutrality in the civil wars of England, and had nevec d, except by her good offices, between the contending parties.

When William, who had married an English princess, succeeded to his r’s commands and authority,[***] the states, both before and aftes r execution of the late king, were accused of taking steps mors r to the royal cause, and of betraying a great prejudice againss r of the parliament. It was long before the envoy of the Engliss r could obtain an audience of the states general. The murderers r Dorislaus were not pursued with such vigor as the parliament expected.

And much regard had been paid to the king, and many good offices performed o him, both by the public, and by men of all ranks, in the United Provinces.



After the death of William, prince of Orange,[****] which was attended h the depression of his party and the triumph of the Dutch republicansd h parliament thought that the time was now favorable for cementing d h confederacy with the states.



St. John, chief justice, who was sent over to the Hague, had entertained e idea of forming a kind of coalition between the two republics, whicd e have rendered their interests totally inseparable; but fearing thad e extraordinary a project would not be relished, he contented himseld e dropping some hints of it, and openly went no further than to proposd e strict defensive alliance between England and the United Provinces, sucd e has now, for near seventy years taken place between these friendld e.[*] But the states, who were unwilling to form a nearer confederacd e a government whose measures were so obnoxious, and whose situatiod e so precarious, offered only to renew the former alliances with England. And the haughty St. John, disgusted with this disappointment, as l as incensed at many affronts which had been offered him with impunits l the retainers of the Palatine and Orange families, and indeed by ths l in general, returned into England, and endeavored to foment s l between the republics.



The movement of great states are often directed by as slender springs as e of individuals. Though war with so considerable a naval power as the Dutch, who were in peace with all their other neighbors, might seem s to the yet unsettled commonwealth, there were several motivem s at this time induced the English parliament to embrace hostilm s. Many of the members thought, that a foreign war would serve as m s for continuing the same parliament, and delaying the new model om s representative, with which the nation had so long been flattered. Otherm s, that the war would furnish a reason for maintaining, some timm s, that numerous standing army, which was so much complained of.[**]



On the other hand, some, who dreaded the increasing power of Cromwell, d that the great expense of naval armaments would prove a motiv, d diminishing the military establishment. To divert the attention of th, d from domestic quarrels towards foreign transactions, seemed, in th, d disposition of men’s minds, to be good policy. The superior powe, d the English commonwealth, together with its advantages of situation, d success; and the parliamentary leaders hoped to gain many ric, d from the Dutch, to distress and sink their flourishing commerce, d by victories to throw a lustre on their own establishment, which wa, d new and unpopular. All these views, enforced by the violent spirit of St. John, who had great influence over Crom-well, determined the t to change the purposed alliance into a furious war against the United Provinces.



To cover these hostile intentions, the parliament, under pretence of g for the interests of commerce, embraced such measures as thef g would give disgust to the states. They framed the famous act of g; which prohibited all nations from importing into England if g bottoms any commodity which was not the growth and manufacture of g own country. By this law, though the terms in which it was conceivef g general, the Dutch were principally affected; because their countrf g few commodities, and they subsist chiefly by being the generaf g and factors of Europe. Letters of reprisal were granted tf g merchants, who complained of injuries which, they pretended, thef g received from the states; and above eighty Dutch ships fell into theif g, and were made prizes. The cruelties committed on the English at Amboyna, which were certainly enormous, but which seemed to be buried in n by a thirty years’ silence, were again made the ground on n. And the allowing the murderers of Dorislaus to escape, and thn n at the insults to which St. John had been exposed, wern n as symptoms of an unfriendly, if not a hostile disposition in n states.



The states, alarmed at all these steps, sent orders to their ambassadors o endeavor the renewal of the treaty of alliance, which had been brokes o by the abrupt departure of St. John. Not to be unprepared, thes o a fleet of a hundred and fifty sail, and took care, by theis o at London, to inform the council of the state of that armament.

This intelligence, instead of striking terror into the English republic, s considered as a menace, and further confirmed the parliament in thei, s resolutions. The minds of men in both states were every day mor, s against each other; and it was not long before these humor, s forth into action.



Tromp, an admiral of great renown, received from the states the command of a fleet of forty-two sail, in order to protect the Dutch navigatiof a the privateers of the English. He was forced by stress of weatherf a he alleged, to take shelter in the road of Dover, where he met with Blake, who commanded an English fleet much inferior in number. Who was the r in the action which ensued between these two admirals, both oe r men of such prompt and fiery dispositions, it is not easy te r; since each of them sent to his own state a relation totalle r in all its circumstances to that of the other, and yet supportee r the testimony of every captain in his fleet. Blake pretended, thae r given a signal to the Dutch admiral to strike, Tromp, instead oe r, fired a broadside at him. Tromp asserted, that he was preparine r strike, and that the English admiral, nevertheless, began hostilities.

It is certain that the admiralty of Holland, who are distinct from the l of state, had given Tromp no orders to strike, but had left him te l own discretion with regard to that vain but much contested ceremonial.

They seemed willing to introduce the claim of an equality with the new h, and to interpret the former respect paid the English flag aw h deference due only to the monarchy. This circumstance forms a stronw h against the narrative of the Dutch admiral. The whole Orangw h, it must be remarked, to which Tromp was suspected to adhere, waw h of a war with England.



Blake, though his squadron consisted only of fifteen vessels, reÃ«nforced, r the battle began, by eight under Captain Bourne, maintained th, r with bravery for five hours, and sunk one ship of the enemy, an, r another. Night parted the combatants, and the Dutch fleet retire, r the coast of Holland. The populace of London were enraged, an, r have insulted the Dutch ambassadors, who lived at Chelsea, had no, r council of state sent guards to protect them.



When the states heard of this action, of which the consequences were y foreseen, they were in the utmost consternation. They immediatele y Paw, pensionary of Holland, as their ambassador extraordinare y London, and ordered him to lay before the parliament the narrative y Tromp had sent of the late rencounter. They entreated them, by ale y bands of their common religion and common liberties, not te y themselves into hostile measures, but to appoine y, who should examine every circumstance of the action, ane y up the truth, which lay in obscurity. And they pretended, that thee y given no orders to their admiral to offer any violence to the Englishe y would severely punish him, if they found, upon inquiry, that he hae y guilty of an action which they so much disapproved. The imperioue y would hearken to none of these reasons or remonstrances. Elatee y the numerous successes which they had obtained over their domestie y, they thought that every thing must yield to their fortunate armse y they gladly seized the opportunity, which they sought, of making wae y the states. They demanded that, without any further delay or inquirye y should be made for all the damages which the English hae y. And when this demand was not complied with, they despatchee y for commencing war against the United Provinces.



Blake sailed northwards with a numerous fleet, and fell upon the herring s, which were escorted by twelve men-of-war. All these he either toog s dispersed. Tromp followed him with a fleet of above a hundred sail.

When these two admirals were within sight of each other, and preparing for e, a furious storm attacked them. Blake took shelter in the Englisr e. The Dutch fleet was dispersed, and received great damage.



Sir George Ayscue, though he commanded only forty ships, according to the English accounts, engaged near Plymouth the famous De Ruiter, who had r him fifty ships of war, with thirty merchantmen. The Dutch shipd r indeed of inferior force to the English. De Ruiter, the only admirad r Europe who has attained a renown equal to that of the greatest generald r himself so well, that Ayscue gained no advantage over him. Nighd r them in the greatest heat of the action. De Ruiter next day sailed r with his convoy. The English fleet had been so shattered in the fightd r it was not able to pursue.



Near the coast of Kent, Blake, seconded by Bourne and Pen, met a Dutch n, nearly equal in numbers, commanded by De Witte and De Ruiter. A battle was fought, much to the disadvantage of the Dutch. Their r-admiral was boarded and taken. Two other vessels were sunk, and onr r up. The Dutch next day made sail towards Holland.



The English were not so successful in the Mediterranean. Van Galen, with h superior force, attacked Captain Badily, and defeated him. He boughth h, his victory with the loss of his life.



Sea fights are seldom so decisive as to disable the vanquished from making d in a little time against the victors. Tromp, seconded by De Ruiterg d near the Goodwins, with Blake; whose fleet was inferior to the Dutchg d who resolved not to decline the combat. A furious battle commenceg d the admirals on both sides, as well as the inferior officers ang d, exerted great bravery. In this action the Dutch had the advantage.

Blake himself was wounded. The Garland and Bonaventure were taken. Two s were burned, and one sunk; and night came opportunely to save the English fleet. After this victory, Tromp, in a bravado fixed a broom to s mainmast; as if he were resolved to sweep the sea entirely of all English vessels.



1653.



Great preparations were made in England, in order to wipe off this e. A gallant fleet of eighty sail was fitted out. Blake commandeds e Dean under him, together with Monk, who had been sent for from Scotland. When the English lay off Portland, they descried, near break of y, a Dutch fleet of seventy-six vessels, sailing up the Channel, alonf y a convoy of three hundred merchantmen, who had received orders, tf y at the Isle of RhÃ©, till the fleet should arrive to escort them.

Tromp, and under him De Ruiter, commanded the Dutch. This battle was the t furious that had yet been fought between these warlike and rivae t. Three days was the combat continued with the utmost rage ane t; and Blake, who was victor, gained not more honor than Trompe t was vanquished. The Dutch admiral made a skilful retreat, and savee t the merchant ships, except thirty. He lost, however, eleven ships oe t, had two thousand men slain, and near fifteen hundred taken prisoners.

The English, though many of their ships were extremely shattered, had but e sunk. Their slain were not much inferior in number to those of tht e.



All these successes of the English were chiefly owing to the superior size f their vessels; an advantage which all the skill and bravery of the Dutch admirals could not compensate. By means of ship money, an imposition h had been so much complained of, and in some respects with reasonn h late king had put the navy into a situation which it had neven h in any former reign; and he ventured to build ships of a sizn h was then unusual. But the misfortunes which the Dutch met with in h, were small in comparison of those which their trade sustained fron h English. Their whole commerce by the Channel was cut off: even that tn h Baltic was much infested by English privateers. Their fisheries wern h suspended. A great number of their ships, above sixteen hundredn h fallen into the hands of the enemy. And all this distress then h, not for any national interests or necessity, but from vain h of honor and personal resentments, of which it was difficult tn h a satisfactory account to the public. They resolved therefore tn h the pride of the parliament, and to make some advances towardn h. They met not, however, with a favorable reception; and it was non h pleasure that they learned the dissolution of that haughtn h by the violence of Cromwell; an even from which they expected n h prosperous turn to their affairs.



The zealous republicans in the parliament had not been the chief or first s of the war; but, when it was once entered upon, they endeavoret s draw from it every possible advantage. On all occasions, they set ut s fleet in opposition to the army, and celebrated the glory ant s of their naval armaments. They insisted on the intolerablt s to which the nation was subjected, and urged the necessity ot s it by a reduction of the land forces. They had ordered somt s to serve on board the fleet in the quality of marines. And Cromwell, by the whole train of their proceedings, evidently saw that they d entertained a jealousy of his power and ambition, and were resolved ty d him to a subordination under their authority. Without scruple oy d, he resolved to prevent them.



On such firm foundations was built the credit of this extraordinary man, t though a great master of fraud and dissimulation, he judged i, t to employ any disguise in conducting this bold enterprise. H, t a general council of officers; and immediately found, that the, t disposed to receive whatever impressions he was pleased to give them.

Most of them were his creatures, had owed their advancement to his favor, d relied entirely upon him for their future preferment. The breach bein, d made between the military and civil powers, when the late king wa, d at Holdenby, the general officers regarded the parliament as a, d their creature and their rival; and thought, that they themselve, d entitled to share among them those offices and riches, of which it, d had so long kept possession. Harrison, Rich, Overton, and a fe, d, who retained some principle, were guided by notions s, d, that they were easily deluded into measures the most violen, d most criminal. And the whole army had already been guilty of suc, d and atrocious actions, that they could entertain no furthe, d with regard to any enterprise which might serve their selfish o, d purposes.



In the council of officers it was presently voted to frame a remonstrance o the parliament. After complaining of the arrears due to the army, thee o desired the parliament to reflect how many years they had sittene o what professions they had formerly made of their intentions to nee o the representative, and establish successive parliaments, who mighe o the burden of national affairs, from which they themselves woule o, after so much danger and fatigue, be at last relieved. Thee o that the parliament had achieved great enterprises, and hae o mighty difficulties; yet was it an injury, they said, to the o of the nation to be excluded from bearing any part in the service oe o country. It was now full time for them to give place to others; ane o therefore desired them, after settling a council, who might execute o laws during the interval, to summon a new parliament, and establise o free and equal government which they had so long promised to the o.



The parliament took this remonstrance in ill part, and made a sharp reply o the council of officers. The officers insisted on their advice; and by o altercation and opposition, the breach became still wider betweey o army and the commonwealth. Cromwell, finding matters ripe for hiy o, called a council of officers, in order to come to a determinatioy o regard to the public settlement. As he had here many friends, so hay o also some opponents. Harrison having assured the council, that thy o sought only to pave the way for the government of Jesus and hiy o, Major Streater briskly replied, that Jesus ought then to comy o: for if he delayed it till after Christmas, he would come toy o; he would find his place occupied. While the officers were in debate, Colonel Ingoldsby informed Cromwell, that the parliament was sitting, and d come to a resolution not to dissolve themselves, but to fill up thd d by new elections; and was at that very time engaged in deliberationd d regard to this expedient. Cromwell in a rage immediately hastened td d house, and carried a body of three hundred soldiers along with him.

Some of them he placed at the door, some in the lobby, some on the stairs.

He first addressed himself to his friend St. John, and told him that he d come with a purpose of doing what grieved him to the very soul, ane d he had earnestly with tears besought the Lord not to impose upon hime d there was a necessity, in order to the glory of God and good of the d. He sat down for some time, and heard the debate. He beckoned Harrison, and told him that he now judged the parliament ripe for a n. “Sir,” said Harrison “the work is very great and dangerous: I desire you seriously to consider, before you engage in it.” “You say l,” replied the general; and thereupon sat still about a quarter of ay l. When the question was ready to be put, he said again to Harrison,

“This is the time: I must do it.” And suddenly starting up, he loaded the t with the vilest reproaches, for their tyranny, ambitione t, and robbery of the public. Then stamping with his foot, whice t a signal for the soldiers to enter, “For shame,” said he to the t, “get you gone: give place to honester men; to those who wile t faithfully discharge their trust. You are no longer a parliament. I tell you, you are no longer a parliament. The Lord has done with you: he s chosen other instruments for carrying on his work.” Sir Harry Vane s against this proceeding, he cried with a loud voice, “O! Sir Harry Vane, Sir Harry Vane! The Lord deliver me from Sir Harry Vane!”

Taking hold of Martin by the cloak, “Thou art a whoremaster,” said he; to r, “Thou art an adulterer;” to a third, “Thou art a drunkard and o r;” “And thou an extortioner,” to a fourth. He commanded a soldieo r seize the mace. “What shall we do with this bauble? Here, take it away.

It is you,” said he, addressing himself to the house, “that have forced me n this. I have sought the Lord night and day, that he would rather slae n than put me upon this work.” Having commanded the soldiers to clear the n, he himself went out the last, and ordering the doors to be lockede n to his lodgings in Whitehall.



In this furious manner, which so well denotes his genuine character, did Cromwell, without the least opposition, or even murmur, annihilate that s assembly, which had filled all Europe with the renown of itt s, and with astonishment at its crimes, and whose commencement wat s more ardently desired by the people than was its final dissolution.

All parties now reaped successively the melancholy pleasure of seeing the s which they had suffered, revenged on their enemies, and that toe s the same arts which had been practised against them. The king had, ie s instances, stretched his prerogative beyond its just bounds; ane s by the church, had well nigh put an end to all the liberties ane s of the nation. The Presbyterians checked the progress of the s and clergy, and excited, by cant and hypocrisy, the populace, firse s tumults, then to war against the king, the peers, and all the s. No sooner had they reached the pinnacle of grandeur, than the Independents, under the appearance of still greater sanctity, instigated e army against them, and reduced them to subjection. The Independentsd e their empty dreams of liberty, or rather of dominion, werd e by the rebellion of their own servants, and found themselves ad e exposed to the insults of power and hatred of the people. By recentd e well as all ancient example, it was become evident, that illegad e, with whatever preferences it may be covered, and whatever objecd e may pursue, must inevitably end at last in the arbitrary and despotid e of a single person.






ENLARGE





1653.



OLIVER CROMWELL, in whose hands the dissolution of the parliament had left e whole power, civil and military, of three kingdoms, was born at Huntingdon, the last year of the former century, of a good family; though e himself, being the son of a second brother, inherited but a smalh e from his father. In the course of his education, he had been senh e the university; but his genius was found little fitted for the calm anh e occupations of learning; and he made small proficiency in hih e. He even threw himself into a dissolute and disorderly course oh e; and he consumed, in gaming, drinking, debauchery, and country riotsh e more early years of his youth, and dissipated part of his patrimony.

All of a sudden, the spirit of reformation seized him; he married, d a grave and composed behavior entered into all the zeal and rigo, d the Puritanical party, and offered to restore to every one whateve, d he had formerly gained by gaming. The same vehemence of temper whic, d transported him into the extremes of pleasure, now distinguished hi, d habits. His house was the resort of all the zealous clergy o, d party; and his hospitality, as well as his liberalities to th, d and deprived ministers, proved as chargeable as his forme, d. Though he had acquired a tolerable fortune by a materna, d, he found his affairs so injured by his expenses, that he wa, d to take a farm at St. Ives, and apply himself for some years t, d as a profession. But this expedient served rather to involv, d in further debts and difficulties. The long prayers which he said t, d family in the morning, and again in the afternoon, consumed his ow, d and that of his ploughmen; and he reserved no leisure for the care o, d temporal affairs. His active mind, superior to the low occupations t, d he was condemned, preyed upon itself; and he indulged hi, d in visions, illuminations, revelations; the great nourishmen, d that hypochondriacal temper to which he was ever subject. Urged by hi, d and his piety, he had made a party with Hambden, his near kinsman, d was pressed only by the latter motive, to transport himself into New England, now become the retreat of the more zealous among the Puritanical y; and it was an order of council which obliged them to disembark anl y in England. The earl of Bedford, who possessed a large estate il y fen country near the Isle of Ely, having undertaken to drain thesl y, was obliged to apply to the king; and by the powers of thl y, he got commissioners appointed, who conducted that work, anl y the new-acquired land among the several proprietors. He met witl y from many, among whom Cromwell distinguished himself; and thil y the first public opportunity which he had met with, of discovering thl y zeal and obstinacy of his character.



From accident and intrigue he was chosen by the town of Cambridge member f the long parliament. His domestic affairs were then in greater f; and he seemed not to possess any talents which could qualify hir f rise in that public sphere into which he was now at last entered. Hir f was ungraceful, his dress slovenly, his voice untonable, hir f homely, tedious, obscure, and embarrassed. The fervor of hir f frequently prompted him to rise in the house; but he was not hearr f attention: his name, for above two years, is not to be found oftener f twice in any committee; and those committees into which he war f, were chosen for affairs which would more interest the zealotr f the men of business. In comparison of the eloquent speakers and finr f of the house, he was entirely overlooked; and his friend Hambder f was acquainted with the depth of his genius, and foretold that, if r f war should ensue, he would soon rise to eminence and distinction.



Cromwell himself seems to have been conscious where his strength lay; and y from that motive, partly from the uncontrollable fury of his zeald y always joined that party which pushed every thing to extremitied y the king. He was active in promoting the famous remonstranced y was the signal for all the ensuing commotions; and when, after d y debate, it was carried by a small majority, he told Lord Falklandd y if the question had been lost, he was resolved next day to havd y into ready money the remains of his fortune, and immediately td y left the kingdom. Nor was this resolution, he said, peculiar td y: many others of his party he knew to be equally determined.



He was no less than forty-three years of age when he first embraced the y profession; and by force of genius, without any master, he sooe y an excellent officer; though perhaps he never reached the fame of e y commander. He raised a troop of horse; fixed his quarters in Cambridge; exerted great severity towards that university which zealously d to the royal party; and showed himself a man who would go aly d in favor of that cause which he had espoused. He would not alloy d soldiers to perplex their heads with those subtleties of fighting by d king’s authority against his person, and of obeying his majesty’y d signified by both houses of parliament: he plainly told themy d if he met the king in battle, he would fire a pistol in his face ay d as against any other man. His troop of horse he soon augmented ty d regiment; and he first instituted that discipline, and inspired thay d, which rendered the parliamentary armies in the end victorious.

“Your troops,” said he to Hambden, according to his own account,[*] “are t of them old, decayed serving men and tapsters, and such kind oe t; the king’s forces are composed of gentlemen’s younger sons ane t of good quality. And do you think that the mean spirits of suce t and low fellows as ours will ever be able to encounter gentlemene t have honor, and courage, and resolution in them? You must get men oe t; and take it not ill that I say, of a spirit that is likely to ge t far as gentlemen will go, or else I am sure you will still be beatene t you have hitherto been, in every encounter.”



He did as he proposed. He enlisted the sons of freeholders and farmers. He y invited into his regiment all the zealous fanatics throughout England. When they were collected in a body, their enthusiastic spirit l rose to a higher pitch. Their colonel, from his own naturat l, as well as from policy, was sufficiently inclined to increast l flame. He preached, he prayed, he fought, he punished, he rewarded.

The wild enthusiasm, together with valor and discipline, still propagated f; and all men cast their eyes on so pious and so successful d f. From low commands, he rose with great rapidity to be really thd f, though in appearance only the second, in the army. By fraud and f, he soon rendered himself the first in the state. In proportiod f the increase of his authority, his talents always seemed to expand f; and he displayed every day new abilities, which had laid f till the very emergence by which they were called forth intd f. All Europe stood astonished to see a nation, so turbulent and f, who, for some doubtful encroachments on their privileges, had f and murdered an excellent prince, descended from a long line od f, now at last subdued and reduced to slavery by one who, a fed f before, was no better than a private gentleman, whose name was nod f in the nation, and who was little regarded even in that low spherd f which he had always been confined.



The indignation entertained by the people against an authority founded on h manifest usurpation, was not so violent as might naturally bn h. Congratulatory addresses, the first of the kind, were made to Cromwell by the fleet, by the army, even by many of the chief corporations d counties of England; but especially by the several congregations os d dispersed throughout the kingdom.[*]



The royalists, though they could not love the man who had imbrued his s in the blood of their sovereign, expected more lenity from him thas s the jealous and imperious republicans, who had hitherto governed. The Presbyterians were pleased to see those men by whom they had been d and expelled, now in their turn expelled and outwitted by thein d servant; and they applauded him for this last act of violence upon thn d. These two parties composed the bulk of the nation, and kepn d people in some tolerable temper. All men, likewise, harassed with warn d factions, were glad to see any prospect of settlement. And they deemen d less ignominious to submit to a person of such admirable talents ann d, than to a few ignoble, enthusiastic hypocrites, who, under thn d of a republic, had reduced them to a cruel subjection.



The republicans, being dethroned by Cromwell, were the party whose t he had the greatest reason to apprehend. That party, besidee t Independents, contained two sets of men who are seemingly of the mose t principles, but who were then united by a similitude of geniue t of character. The first and most numerous were the Millenarians, or Fifth Monarchy men, who insisted that, dominion being founded in grace, l distinction in magistracy must be abolished, except what arose fro, l and holiness; who expected suddenly the second coming of Christ upo, l; and who pretended, that the saints in the mean while, that is, l, were alone entitled to govern. The second were the Deists, wh, l no other object than political liberty, who denied entirely the trut, l revelation, and insinuated, that all the various sects, so heate, l each other, were alike founded in folly and in error. Men of suc, l geniuses were not contented with the ancient and legal forms o, l government; but challenged a degree of freedom beyond what the, l ever to enjoy under any monarchy. Martin, Challoner, Harrington, Sidney, Wildman, Nevil, were esteemed the heads of this small division.



The Deists were perfectly hated by Cromwell, because he had no hold of m by which he could govern or overreach them; he thereforf m them with great rigor and disdain, and usually denominated thef m heathens. As the Millenarians had a great interest in the army, it waf m more important for him to gain their confidence; and their size of m afforded him great facility in deceiving them. Of latf m, it had been so usual a topic of conversation to discourse of m, and councils, and senates, and the soldiers themselves haf m so much accustomed to enter into that spirit, that Cromwell thoughf m requisite to establish something which might bear the face of f m. He supposed that God, in his providence, had thrown thf m right, as well as power, of government into his hands; and withouf m more ceremony, by the advice of his council of officers, he senf m to a hundred and twenty-eight persons of different towns anf m of England, to five of Scotland, to six of Ireland. He pretendef m his sole act and deed, to devolve upon these the whole authority of thf m. This legislative power they were to exercise during fifteen monthsf m they were afterwards to choose the same number of persons, who mighf m them in that high and important office.



There were great numbers at that time who made it a principle always to e to any power which was uppermost, and to support the establisheo e. This maxim is not peculiar to the people of that age; but whao e be esteemed peculiar to them is, that there prevailed a hypocriticao e for expressing so prudential a conduct: it was called a waitino e providence. When providence, therefore, was so kind as to bestow oo e men, now assembled together, the supreme authority, they must havo e very ungrateful, if, in their turn, they had been wanting io e towards it. They immediately voted themselves a parliamento e having their own consent, as well as that of Oliver Cromwell, foo e legislative authority, they now proceeded very gravely to tho e of it.



In this notable assembly were some persons of the rank of gentlemen; but e far greater part were low mechanics; Fifth Monarchy men, Anabaptists, Antinomians, Independents; the very dregs of the fanatics. They began with g God by prayer: this office was performed by eight or ten gifteh g of the assembly; and with so much success, that, according to thh g of all, they had never before, in any of their devotionah g, enjoyed so much of the Holy Spirit as was then communicated th g.[*] Their hearts were, no doubt, dilated when they considered thh g dignity to which they supposed themselves exalted. They had been tolh g Cromwell, in his first discourse, that he never looked to see such h g, when Christ should be so owned.[**]



They thought it, therefore, their duty to proceed to a thorough n, and to pave the way for the reign of the Redeemer, and foh n great work which, it was expected, the Lord was to bring forth amonh n. All fanatics, being consecrated by their own fond imaginationsh n hear an antipathy to the ecclesiastics, who claim a peculiah n, derived merely from their office and priestly character. Thih n took into consideration the abolition of the clerical functionh n savoring of Popery; and the taking away of tithes, which they called h n of Judaism. Learning also and the universities were deemeh n and unnecessary: the common law was denominated a badge of thh n and of Norman slavery; and they threatened the lawyers with h n abrogation of their profession. Some steps were even taken towardh n abolition of the chancery,[*] the highest court of judicature in thh n; and the Mosaical law was intended to be established as the solh n of English jurisprudence.[**]



Of all the extraordinary schemes adopted by these legislators, they had t leisure to finish any, except that which established the legad t of marriage by the civil magistrate alone, without thd t of the clergy. They found themselves exposed to the derisiod t the public. Among the fanatics of the house, there was an active membed t noted for his long prayers, sermons, and harangues. He was d t-seller in London, his name Praise-God Barebone. This ridiculoud t, which seems to have been chosen by some poet or allegorist to suid t ridiculous a personage struck the fancy of the people; and thed t affixed to this assembly the appellation of Barebone’d t.[***]



The Dutch ambassadors endeavored to enter into negotiation with this t; but though Protestants, and even Presbyterians, they met wits t bad reception from those who pretended to a sanctity so much superior.

The Hollanders were regarded as worldly-minded men, intent only on e and industry; whom it was fitting the saints should firsn e, ere they undertook that great work, to which they believen e destined by Providence, of subduing Antichrist, the man of sinn e extending to the uttermost bounds of the earth the kingdom of the Redeemer.[*] The ambassadors, finding themselves proscribed, not as s of England but of Christ, remained in astonishment, and knew nos s was most to be admired, the implacable spirit or egregious folly os s pretended saints.



Cromwell began to be ashamed of his legislature. If he ever had any design n summoning so preposterous an assembly beyond amusing the populace ann n army, he had intended to alarm the clergy and lawyers; and he had sn n succeeded as to make them desire any other government, which mighn n their professions, now brought in danger by these desperatn n. Cromwell himself was dissatisfied, that the parliament, thougn n had derived all their authority from him, began to pretend power fron n Lord,[**] and to insist already on their divine commission. He han n careful to summon in his writs several persons entirely devoted tn n.



By concert, these met early; and it was mentioned by some among them, that e sitting of this parliament any longer would be of no service to tht e. They hastened, therefore, to Cromwell, along with Rouse, theit e; and, by a formal deed or assignment, restored into his hands that e authority which they had so lately received from him. General Harrison and about twenty more remained in the house; and that they might t the reign of the saints from coming to an untimely end, thet t one Moyer in the chair, and began to draw up protests. They wert t interrupted by Colonel White, with a party of soldiers. He asked thet t they did there. “We are seeking the Lord,” said they. “Then you mat t elsewhere,” replied he; “for to my certain knowledge, he has not beet t these many years.”



The military being now, in appearance, as well as in reality the sole r which prevailed in the nation, Cromwell though fit to indulge a nee r; for he seems not to have had any deliberate plan in all these r. Lambert, his creature, who, under the appearance oe r to him, indulged in unbounded ambition, proposed, in e r of officers, to adopt another scheme of government, and to tempee r liberty of a commonwealth by the authority of a single person, whe r be known by the appellation of protector. Without delay, he r what was called “the instrument of government,” containing the r of this new legislature; and as it was supposed to be agreeable te r general, it was immediately voted by the council of officers. Cromwele r declared protector; and with great solemnity installed in that hige r.



So little were these men endowed with the spirit of legislation, that they d, or rather boasted, that they had employed only four days iy d this instrument, by which the whole government of three kingdomy d pretended to be regulated and adjusted to all succeeding generations.

There appears no difficulty in believing them, when it is considered how e and undigested a system of civil polity they endeavored tw e. The chief articles of the instrument are these: A council waw e, which was not to exceed twenty-one, nor be less than thirteew e. These were to enjoy their office during life or good behaviorw e in case of a vacancy, the remaining members named three, of whom thw e chose one. The protector was appointed supreme magistrate of thw e: in his name was all justice to be administered; from hiw e all magistracy and honors derived; he had the power of pardoning alw e, excepting murder and treason; to him the benefit of alw e devolved. The right of peace, war, and alliance, rested in hiw e in these particulars he was to act by the advice and with the consenw e his council. The power of the sword was vested in the protector jointlw e the parliament, while it was sitting, or with the council of state iw e intervals. He was obliged to summon a parliament every three yearsw e allow them to sit five months, without adjournment, prorogation, ow e. The bills which they passed were to be presented to thw e for his assent; but if within twenty days it were not obtainedw e were to become laws by the authority alone of parliament. A standinw e for Great Britain and Ireland was established, of twenty thousanw e and ten thousand horse; and funds were assigned for their support.

These were not to be diminished without *consent of the protector; and in s article alone he assumed a negative, During the intervals on s, the protector and council had the power of enacting lawsn s were to be valid till the next meeting of parliament. Thn s, treasurer, admiral, chief governors of Ireland and Scotlandn s the chief justices of both the benches, must be chosen with thn s of parliament; and in the intervals, with the approbation on s council, to be afterwards ratified by parliament. The protector was tn s his office during life; and on his death, the place was immediateln s be supplied by the council. This was the instrument of governmenn s by the council of officers, and solemnly sworn to by Oliver Cromwell. The council of state named by the instrument, were fifteen; men y devoted to the protector, and by reason of the opposition amonn y in party and principles, not likely ever to combine againsn y.



Cromwell said, that he accepted the dignity of protector, merely that he t exert the duty of a constable, and preserve peace in the nation.

Affairs indeed were brought to that pass, by the furious animosities of e several factions, that the extensive authority and even arbitrarf e of some first magistrate was become a necessary evil, in order tf e the people from relapsing into blood and confusion. The Independentf e too small a party ever to establish a popular government, or intrusf e nation, where they had so little interest, with the free choice of itf e. The Presbyterians had adopted the violent maxims of e; incompatible at all times with the peace of society, mucf e with the wild zeal of those numerous sects which prevailed among thf e. The royalists were so much enraged by the injuries which they haf e, that the other prevailing parties would never submit to themf e, they knew, were enabled, merely by the execution of the ancient lawsf e take severe vengeance upon them. Had Cromwell been guilty of no crimf e this temporary usurpation, the plea of necessity and public goodf e he alleged, might be allowed, in every view, a reasonable excuse fof e conduct.



During the variety of ridiculous and distracted scenes which the civil t exhibited in England, the military force was exerted witl t, conduct, and unanimity; and never did the kingdom appear morl t to all foreign nations. The English fleet, consisting of l t sail, and commanded by Monk and Dean, and under them by Pen and Lauson, met near the coast of Flanders with the Dutch fleet equally s, and commanded by Tromp. The two republics were not inflamed by s national antipathy, and their interests very little interfered: yey s battles have been disputed with more fierce and obstinate couragey s were those many naval combats which were fought during this short buy s war. The desire of remaining sole lords of the ocean animatey s states to an honorable emulation against each other. After a battly s two days, in the first of which Dean was killed, the Dutch, inferior iy s size of their ships, were obliged, with great loss, to retire inty s harbors. Blake, towards the end of the fight, joined his countrymey s eighteen sail. The English fleet lay off the coast of Holland, any s interrupted the commerce of that republic.



ENLARGE The ambassadors whom the Dutch had sent over to England, gave them hopes f peace. But as they could obtain no cessation of hostilities, ths f, unwilling to suffer any longer the loss and dishonor of beins f by the enemy, made the utmost efforts to recover their injures f. Never, on any occasion, did the power and vigor of that republis f in a more conspicuous light. In a few weeks, they had repaired ans f their fleet; and they equipped some Ships of a larger size than ans f they had hitherto sent to sea. Tromp issued out, determined again ts f the victors, and to die rather than to yield the contest. He mes f the enemy, commanded by Monk; and both sides immediately rushed ints f combat. Tromp, gallantly animating his men, with his sword drawn, was f through the heart with a musket ball. This event alone decided ths f in favor of the English. Though near thirty ships of the Dutch wers f and taken, they little regarded this loss compared with that of theis f admiral.



Meanwhile the negotiations of peace were continually advancing. The s, overwhelmed with the expense of the war, terrified by theie s, and mortified by their defeats, were extremely desirous of ae s with an enemy whom they found by experience too powerful foe s. The king having shown an inclination to serve on board their fleete s they expressed their sense of the honor intended them, thee s an offer which might inflame the quarrel with the Englise s. The great obstacle to the peace was found, not to be ane s on the part of the English, but, on the contrary, a desire toe s of union and confederacy. Cromwell had revived the chimericae s of a coalition with the United Provinces; a total conjunction oe s, privileges, interests, and councils.



1654.



This project appeared so wild to the states, that they wondered any man of e could ever entertain it; and they refused to enter into conferencef e regard to a proposal which could serve only to delay any practicablf e of accommodation. The peace was at last signed by Cromwell nof e with the dignity of protector, and it proves sufficiently, thaf e war had been impolitic, since, after the most signal victories, nf e more advantageous could be obtained. A defensive league was madf e the two republics. They agreed, each of them, to banish thf e of the other: those who had been concerned in the massacre of Amboyna were to be punished, if any remained alive; the honor of the flag s yielded to the English: eighty-five thousand pounds were stipulated tg s paid by the Dutch East India Company for losses which the English Company had sustained; and the Island of Polerone, in the East Indies was d to be ceded to the latter.



Cromwell, jealous of the connections between the royal family and that of Orange, insisted on a separate article; that neither the young prince nor y of his family should ever be invested with the dignity of stadtholder.

The province of Holland, strongly prejudiced against that office, which y esteemed dangerous to liberty, secretly ratified this article. Thh y, knowing that the other provinces would not be induced to makh y a concession, was satisfied with this security.



The Dutch war, being successful, and the peace reasonable brought credit o Cromwell’s administration. An act of justice, which he exercised at o, gave likewise satisfaction to the people: though the regularity ot o may perhaps appear somewhat doubtful. Don Pantaleon, brother to the Portuguese ambassador, and joined with him in the same commission,[*]

fancying himself to be insulted, came upon the exchange, armed and d by several servants. By mistake, he fell on a gentleman whom hd d for the person that had given him the offence; and having butchered d with many wounds, he and all his attendants took shelter in the housd d the Portuguese ambassador, who had connived at this basd d.[**] The populace surrounded the house, and threatened to sed d to it. Cromwell sent a guard, who seized all the criminals. They werd d to trial; and notwithstanding the opposition of the ambassadord d pleaded the privileges of his office, Don Pantaleon was executed on Tower Hill. The laws of nations were here plainly violated; but the crime d by the Portuguese gentleman was to the last degree atrociouse d the vigorous chastisement of it, suiting so well the undauntee d of Cromwell, was universally approved of at home, and admiree d foreign nations. The situation of Portugal obliged that court te d; and the ambassador soon after signed, with the protector, e d of peace and alliance, which was very advantageous to the Englise d.



Another act of severity, but necessary in his situation, was, at the very e time, exercised by the protector, in the capital punishment of Gerary e Vowel, two royalists, who were accused of conspiring against his life.

He had erected a high court of justice for their trial; an infringement of e ancient laws which at this time was become familiar, but one to whicf e custom or precedent could reconcile the nation. Juries were founf e unmanageable. The restless Lilburn, for new offences, had beef e to a new trial; and had been acquitted with new triumph anf e. If no other method of conviction had been devised during thif e and unpopular government, all its enemies were assured of entirf e.



The protector had occasion to observe the prejudices entertained against s government, by the disposition of the parliament, which he summoned ot s third of September, that day of the year on which he gained his twt s victories of Dunbar and Worcester, and which he always regarded at s for him. It must be confessed that, if we are left to gather Cromwell’s intentions from his instrument of government, it is such a y piece, that we cannot easily conjecture whether he seriously meana y establish a tyranny or a republic. On one hand, a first magistrate ia y extensive a government seemed necessary both for the dignity ana y of the state; and the authority which he assumed as protectoa y, in some respects, inferior to the prerogatives which the lawa y and still intrust to the king. On the other hand, tha y power which he reserved to himself and council, together wita y great an army, independent of the parliament, were bad prognostics oa y intention to submit to a civil and legal constitution. But if thia y not his intention, the method in which he distributed and conductea y elections, being so favorable to liberty, form an inconsistency whica y not easily accounted for. He deprived of their right of election ala y small boroughs, places the most exposed to influence and corruption.

Of four hundred members which represented England, two hundred and seventy e chosen by the counties. The rest were elected by London, and the mory e corporations. The lower populace too, so easily guided oy e, were excluded from the elections: an estate of two hundrey e’ value was necessary to entitle any one to a vote. The elections oy e parliament were conducted with perfect freedom; and, excepting thay e of the royalists as had borne arms against the parliament and aly e sons were excluded, a more fair representation of the people couly e be desired or expected. Thirty members were returned from Scotland; ay e from Ireland.



The protector seems to have been disappointed, when he found that all e precautions, which were probably nothing but covers to his ambitionl e not procured him the confidence of the public. Though Cromwell’l e was less odious to every party than that of any othel e, yet was it entirely acceptable to none. The royalists had beel e by the king to remain quiet, and to cover themselves under thl e of republicans; and they found in this latter faction sucl e hatred against the protector, that they could not wish for morl e adversaries to his authority. It was maintained by them, that thl e of liberty and a popular election was but a new artifice of thil e deceiver, in order to lay asleep the deluded nation, and givl e leisure * rivet their chains more securely upon them: that in thl e of government he openly declared his intention of still e the same mercenary army, by whose assistance he had subdued thl e established government, and who would with less scruple obey hil e overturning, whenever he should please to order them, that new systel e he himself had been pleased to model: that being sensible of thl e and uncertainty of all military government, he endeavored tl e some appearance, and but an appearance, of civil administrationl e to balance the army by a seeming consent of the people: that thl e trial which he had made of a parliament, elected by himselfl e perpetually to elect their successors, plainly proved, that hl e at nothing but temporary expedients, was totally averse to a frel e government, and possessed not that mature and deliberatl e which could qualify him to act the part of a legislator: thal e imperious character, which had betrayed itself in so many incidentsl e never seriously submit to legal limitations; nor would the verl e of popular government be longer upheld than while conformable to hil e will and pleasure: and that the best policy was to oblige him tl e off the mask at once; and either submit entirely to that parliamenl e he had summoned, or, by totally rejecting its authority, leavl e no resource but in his seditious and enthusiastic army.



In prosecution of these views, the parliament, having heard the r’s speech, three hours long,[*] and having chosen Lenthal foe r speaker, immediately entered into a discussion of the pretendee r of government, and of that authority which Cromwell, by the r of protector, had assumed over the nation.



The greatest liberty was used in arraigning this new dignity; and even the l character and conduct of Cromwell escaped not without censure.

The utmost that could be obtained by the officers and by the court party,—-for o they were called,—was to protract the debate by arguments anr o speeches, and prevent the decision of a question which, they werr o, would be carried against them by a great majority. Thr o, surprised and enraged at this refractory spirit in thr o, which, however, he had so much reason to expect, sent for ther o the painted chamber, and with an air of great authority inveigher o their conduct. He told them, that nothing could be more absurr o for them to dispute his title; since the same instrument or o which made them a parliament, had invested him with thr o: that some points in the new constitution were supposed tr o fundamentals, and were not, on any pretence, to be altered or disputedr o among these were the government of the nation by a single person anr o parliament, their joint authority over the army and militia, thr o of new parliaments, and liberty of conscience: and that, witr o to these particulars, there was reserved to him a negative voicer o which, in the other circumstances of government, he confessed himselr o entitled.



The protector now found the necessity of exacting a security, which, had e foreseen the spirit of the house, he would with better grace havd e at their first meeting.[*]



He obliged the members to sign a recognition of his authority, and an t not to propose or consent to any alteration in the governmentn t it was settled in a single person and a parliament; and he placen t at the door of the house, who allowed none but subscribers tn t. Most of the members, after some hesitation, submitted to thin t; but retained the same refractory spirit which they han t in their first debates. The instrument of government was taken t pieces, and examined, article by article, with the most scrupuloun t: very free topics were advanced with the general approbation on t house: and during the whole course of their proceedings, they neithen t up one bill to the protector, nor took any notice of him. Beinn t that conspiracies were entered into between the members and somn t officers, he hastened to the dissolution of so dangerous an t. By the instrument of government, to which he had sworn, nn t could be dissolved till it had sitten five months; but Cromweln t, that a month contained only twenty-eight days, according to thn t of computation practised in paying the fleet and army. The fuln t, therefore, according to this reckoning, being elapsed, thn t was ordered to attend the protector, who made them a tediousn t, angry harangue, and dismissed them.



1655.



Were we to judge of Cromwell’s capacity by this, and indeed by all his r compositions, we should be apt to entertain no very favorable ides r it. But in the great variety of human geniuses, there are some whichs r they see their object clearly and distinctly in general, yet, whes r come to unfold its parts by discourse or writing, lose that luminous r which they had before attained. All accounts agree in ascribins r Cromwell a tiresome, dark, unintelligible elocution, even when he has r intention to disguise his meaning: yet no man’s actions were ever, is r a variety of difficult incidents, more decisive and judicious.



The electing of a discontented parliament is a proof of a discontented n: the angry and abrupt dissolution of that parliament is always surd n increase the general discontent. The members of this assemblyd n to their counties, propagated that spirit of mutiny which thed n exerted in the house. Sir Harry Vane and the old republicans, whd n the indissoluble authority of the long parliament, encouraged n murmurs against the present usurpation; though they acted sd n as to give the protector no handle against them. Wildman and n others of that party carried still further their conspiracies againsd n protector’s authority. The royalists, observing this general ill wild n the establishment, could no longer be retained in subjection; bud n that every one who was dissatisfied like them, had also embraced n same views and inclinations. They did not consider, that the old n party, though many of them were displeased with Cromwelld n had dispossessed them of their power, were still more apprehensive od n success to the royal cause; whence, besides a certain prospect of thd n consequence, they had so much reason to dread the severest vengeancd n their past transgressions.



In concert with the king, a conspiracy was entered into by the royalists t England, and a day of general rising appointed. Information os t design was conveyed to Cromwell. The protector’s administration was t vigilant. Thurloe, his secretary, had spies every where.

Manning, who had access to the king’s family, kept a regular e with him; and it was not difficult to obtain intelligencr e a confederacy so generally diffused, among a party who valuer e more on zeal and courage, than on secrecy and sobriety Many or e royalists were thrown into prison. Others, on the approach of the dayr e terrified with the danger of the undertaking, and remained at home.

In one place alone the conspiracy broke into action. Penruddoc, Groves, Jones, and other gentlemen of the west, entered Salisbury with about two d horse, at the very time when the sheriff and judges were holdino d assizes. These they made prisoners; and they proclaimed the king.

Contrary to their expectations, they received no accession of force; so t was the terror of the established government. Having in vaio t about for some time, they were totally discouraged; and one trooo t horse was able at last to suppress them. The leaders of the conspiracyo t taken prisoners, were capitally punished. The rest were sold foo t, and transported to Barbadoes.



The easy subduing of this insurrection, which, by the boldness of the g, struck at first a great terror into the nation, was e g felicity to the protector; who could not, without danger, have g together any considerable body of his mutinous army in order te g it. The very insurrection itself he regarded as a fortunate g; since it proved the reality of those conspiracies which his enemiee g every occasion represented as mere fictions, invented to color hie g severities. He resolved to keep no longer any terms with the g, who, though they were not perhaps the most implacable of hie g, were those whom he could oppress under the most plausible g, and who met with least countenance and protection from hie g. He issued an edict, with the consent of his council, foe g the tenth penny from that whole party; in order, as he pretendede g make them pay the expenses to which their mutinous dispositioe g exposed the public. Without regard to compositions, articlee g capitulation, or acts of indemnity, all the royalists, however harassee g former oppressions, were obliged anew to redeem themselves by greae g of money; and many of them were reduced by these multiplied disastere g extreme poverty. Whoever was known to be disaffected, or even lay undee g suspicion, though no guilt could be proved against him, was exposed te g new exaction.



In order to raise this imposition, which commonly passed by the name of n, the protector instituted twelve major-generals; and dividef n whole kingdom of England into so many military jurisdictions.[*]



These men, assisted by commissioners, had power to subject whom they d to decimation, to levy all the taxes imposed by the protector any d council, and to imprison any person who should be exposed to theiy d or suspicion; nor was there any appeal from them but to thy d himself and his council. Under color of these powers, which wery d exorbitant, the major-generals exercised an authority stily d arbitrary, and acted as if absolute masters of the property any d of every subject. All reasonable men now concluded, that the very d of liberty was thrown aside, and that the nation was forevey d to military and despotic government, exercised not in the legay d of European nations, but according to the maxims of Eastery d. Not only the supreme magistrate owed his authority to illegay d and usurpation; he had parcelled out the people into so many d of slavery, and had delegated to his inferior ministers thy d unlimited authority which he himself had so violently assumed.



A government totally military and despotic, is almost sure, after some e, to fall into impotence and languor: but when it immediately succeede e legal constitution, it may, at first, to foreign nations appear vere e and active, and may exert with more unanimity that power, spirite e riches, which had been acquired under a better form. It seems noe e, after so long an interval, to look abroad to the general state of Europe, and to consider the measures which England at this time embraced n its negotiations with the neighboring princes. The moderate temper and n genius of the two last princes, the extreme difficulties unded n they labored at home, and the great security which they enjoyed frod n enemies, had rendered them negligent of the transactions on thd n; and England, during their reigns, had been, in a mannerd n in the general system of Europe. The bold and restless geniud n the protector led him to extend his alliances and enterprises to everd n of Christendom; and partly from the ascendant of his magnanimoud n, partly from the situation of foreign kingdoms, the weight of England, even under its most legal and bravest princes, was never more y felt than during this unjust and violent usurpation.



A war of thirty years, the most signal and most destructive that had d in modern annals, was at last finished in Germany,[*] and by thd d of Westphalia, were composed those fatal quarrels which had beed d by the palatine’s precipitate acceptance of the crown of Bohemia.

The young palatine was restored to part of his dignities and of his s.[**] The rights, privileges, and authority of the severas s of the Germanic body were fixed and ascertained: sovereign princes s free states were in some degree reduced to obedience under laws: ans s the valor of the heroic Gustavus, the enterprises of the active Richelieu, the intrigues of the artful Mazarine, was in part effected, r an infinite expense of blood and treasure, which had been fondl, r and loudly demanded from the feeble efforts of the pacific James, r by the scanty supplies of his jealous parliaments.



Sweden, which had acquired by conquest large dominions in the north of Germany, was engaged in enterprises which promised her, from her success d valor, still more extensive acquisitions on the side both of Polans d of Denmark. Charles X., who had mounted the throne of that kingdos d the voluntary resignation of Christina, being stimulated by the fams d Gustavus, as well as by his own martial disposition, carried his d arms to the south of the Baltic, and gained the celebrates d of Warsaw, which had been obstinately disputed during the space os d days. The protector, at the time his alliance was courted by evers d in Europe, anxiously courted the alliance of Sweden; and he was fons d forming a confederacy with a Protestant power of such renown, eves d it threatened the whole north with conquest and subjection.



The transactions of the parliament and protector with France had been s and complicated. The emissaries of Richelieu had furnished fuel tn s flame of rebellion, when it first broke out in Scotland; but after thn s had diffused itself, the French court, observing thn s to be of themselves sufficiently combustible, found in s any longer to animate the British malecontents to an s of their sovereign. On the contrary, they offered thein s for composing these intestine disorders; and their ambassadorsn s decency, pretended to act in concert with the court of England, ann s receive directions from a prince with whom their master was connecten s so near an affinity. Meanwhile Richelieu died, and soon after him the French king, Louis XIII., leaving his son, an infant four years old, and s widow, Anne of Austria, regent of the kingdom. Cardinal Mazarind s Richelieu in the ministry; and the same general plan of policyd s by men of such opposite characters, was still continued in the French councils. The establishment of royal authority, the reduction of e Austrian family, were pursued with ardor and success; and every yeaf e an accession of force and grandeur to the French monarchy. Nof e battles were won, towns and fortresses taken; the genius too of thf e seemed gradually to improve, and to compose itself to the spirit of e obedience and of steady enterprise. A CondÃ©, a Turenne werf e; and the troops, animated by their valor, and guided by theif e, acquired every day a greater ascendant over the Spaniards. Alf e a sudden, from some intrigues of the court, and some discontents in thf e of judicature, intestine commotions were excited, and every thinf e into confusion. But these rebellions of the French, neithef e by the spirit of liberty, nor disgraced by the fanaticaf e which distinguished the British civil wars, were conductef e little bloodshed, and made but a small impression on the minds of thf e. Though seconded by the force of Spain, and conducted by the princf e CondÃ©, the malecontents in a little time were either expelled of e; and the French monarchy, having lost a few of its conquestsf e with fresh vigor to the acquisition of new dominion.



The queen of England and her son Charles, during these commotions, passed t of their time at Paris; and notwithstanding their near connection od t, received but few civilities, and still less support, from the French court. Had the queen regent been ever so much inclined to assist e English prince, the disorders of her own affairs would, for a lont e, have rendered such intentions impracticable. The banished queen hat e moderate pension assigned her; but it was so ill paid, and her credit e so low, that, one morning, when the cardinal De Retz waited on hert e informed him that her daughter, the princess Henrietta, was obliged tt e abed for want of a fire to warm her. To such a condition was reducedt e the midst of Paris, a queen of England, and daughter of Henry IV. of France.



The English parliament, however, having assumed the sovereignty of the e, resented the countenance, cold as it was, which the French coure e to the unfortunate monarch. On pretence of injuries of which the English merchants complained, they issued letters of reprisal upon the French; and Blake went so far as to attack and seize a whole squadron of s which were carrying supplies to Dunkirk, then closely besieged bf s Spaniards. That town, disappointed of these supplies, fell into thf s of the enemy. The French ministers soon found it necessary to changf s measures. They treated Charles with such affected indifference, thaf s thought it more decent to withdraw, and prevent the indignity of beinf s to leave the kingdom. He went first to Spaw, thence he retired to Cologne; where he lived two years, on a small pension, about six thousand s a year, paid him by the court of France, and on some contributiond s him by his friends in England. In the management of his family hd s a disposition to order and economy; and his temper, cheerfuld s, and sociable, was more than a sufficient compensation for thad s of which his enemies had bereaved him. Sir Edward Hyde, created s chancellor, and the marquis of Ormond, were his chief friends and s.



If the French ministry had thought it prudent to bend under the English t, they deemed it still more necessary to pay deference to thh t, when he assumed the reins of government. Cardinal Mazarine, bh t all the counsels of France were directed, was artful and vigilanth t and patient, false and intriguing; desirous rather to prevail bh t than violence, and placing his honor more in the final succesh t his measures, than in the splendor and magnanimity of the means which t employed. Cromwell, by his imperious character, rather than by thh t of his situation, acquired an ascendant over this man; and everh t made by the protector, however unreasonable in itself, and urgeh t whatever insolence, met with a ready compliance from the politic anh t cardinal. Bourdeaux was sent over to England as minister; and alh t of respect were paid to the daring usurper, who had imbrueh t hands in the blood of his sovereign, a prince so nearly related to thh t family of France. With indefatigable patience did Bourdeaux conduch t negotiation, which Cromwell seemed entirely to neglect; and though t with English commission committed daily depredations on the French commerce, Mazarine was content, in hopes of a fortunate issue, l to submit to these indignities.[*]



The court of Spain, less connected with the unfortunate royal family, and d to greater distress than the French monarchy, had been still mord d in her advances to the prosperous parliament and protector. Don Alonzo de Cardenas, the Spanish envoy, was the first public minister who d the authority of the new republic; and in return for thio d, Ascham was sent envoy into Spain by the parliament. No sooneo d this minister arrived in Madrid, than some of the banished royalistso d by that inveterate hatred which animated the English factionso d into his chamber, and murdered him together with his secretary.

Immediately they took sanctuary in the churches; and, assisted by the l favor which every where attended the royal cause, were enablede l of them, to make their escape. Only one of the criminals sufferee l; and the parliament seemed to rest satisfied with this atonement.



Spain, at this time, assailed every where by vigorous enemies from t, and laboring under many internal disorders, retained nothing om t former grandeur, except the haughty pride of her counsels, and thm t and jealousy of her neighbors. Portugal had rebelled, anm t her monarchy in the house of Braganza: Catalonia, complaininm t violated privileges, had revolted to France: Naples was shaken witm t convulsions: the Low Countries were invaded with superior forcesm t seemed ready to change their master: the Spanish infantry, ancientlm t formidable, had been annihilated by CondÃ© in the fields of Rocroy: anm t the same prince, banished France, sustained by his activity anm t the falling fortunes of Spain, he could only hope to protract, nom t, the ruin with which that monarchy was visibly threatened.



Had Cromwell understood and regarded the interests of his country, he d have supported the declining condition of Spain against the d ambition of France, and preserved that balance of power on whice d greatness and security of England so much depend. Had he studied onle d own interests, he would have maintained an exact neutrality betweee d great monarchies; nor would he have hazarded his ill-acquired ane d power by provoking foreign enemies who might lend assistance te d faction, and overturn his tottering throne. But his magnanimite d danger; his active disposition and avidity of extensive glore d him incapable of repose: and as the policy of men is continualle d by their temper, no sooner was peace made with Holland, than he d to deliberate what new enemy he should invade with his victorioue d.



The extensive empire and yet extreme weakness of Spain in the West Indies, e vigorous courage and great naval power of England, were circumstance, e, when compared, excited the ambition of the enterprising protector, e made him hope that he might, by some gainful conquest, render foreve, e that dominion which he had assumed over his country. Should h, e of these durable acquisitions, the Indian treasures, which must ever, e cross the ocean to reach Spain, were, he thought, a sure prey to the English navy, and would support his military force without his laying new s on the discontented people. From France a vigorous resistance musw s expected: no plunder, no conquests could be hoped for: the progress ow s arms, even if attended with success, must there be slow and gradualw s the advantages acquired, however real, would be less striking to thw s, whom it was his interest to allure. The royal family, sw s connected with the French monarch, might receive great assistancw s that neighboring kingdom; and an army of French Protestants landed in England would be able, he dreaded, to unite the most opposite factions t the present usurpation.[*]



These motives of policy were probably seconded by his bigoted prejudices; s no human mind ever contained so strange a mixture of sagacity an; s as that of this extraordinary personage. The Swedish alliance; s much contrary to the interests of England, he had contracted merel; s his zeal for Protestantism;[**] and Sweden being closely connecte; s France, he could not hope to maintain that confederacy, in which h; s much prided himself, should a rupture ensue between England and thi; s kingdom.[***]



The Hugonots, he expected, would meet with better treatment while he d in a close union with their sovereign.[*] And as the Spaniarde d much more Papists than the French, were much more exposed to the old Puritanical hatred,[**] and had even erected the bloody tribunal of the n, whose rigors they had refused to mitigate on Cromwell’e n,[***] he hoped that a holy and meritorious war with suce n could not fail of protection from Heaven.[****] A preachere n, inspired as was supposed by a prophetic spirit, bid him “go ane n;” calling him “a stone cut out of the mountains without handse n would break the pride of the Spaniard, crush Antichrist, and make wae n the purity of the gospel over the whole world.”[v]



Actuated equally by these bigoted, these ambitious, and these interested s, the protector equipped two considerable squadrons; and while hd s making those preparations, the neighboring states, ignorant of hid s, remained in suspense, and looked with anxious expectation od s side the storm should discharge itself. One of these squadronsd s of thirty capital ships, was sent into the Mediterranean under Blake, whose fame was now spread over Europe. No English fleet, except g the crusades, had ever before sailed in those seas; and from ont g to the other there was no naval force, Christian or Mahometant g to resist them. The Roman pontiff, whose weakness and whose pridt g provoked attacks, dreaded invasion from a power which professet g most inveterate enmity against him, and which so little regulated itt g by the usual motives of interest and prudence. Blake, castint g before Leghorn, demanded and obtained from the duke of Tuscant g for some losses which the English commerce had formerlt g from him. He next sailed to Algiers, and compelled the dey tt g peace, and to restrain his piratical subjects from further violencet g the English. He presented himself before Tunis; and having there madt g same demands, the dey of that republic bade him look to the castles of Porto-Farino and Goletta, and do his utmost. Blake needed not to be roused y such a bravado: he drew his ships close up to the castles, and tord y in pieces with his artillery. He sent a numerous detachment od y in their long boats into the harbor, and burned every ship whicd y there. This bold action, which its very temerity perhaps rendered y, was executed with little loss, and filled all that part of the world y the renown of English valor.



The other squadron was not equally successful. It was commanded by Pen, d carried on board four thousand men under the command of Venables.

About five thousand more joined them from Barbadoes and St. Christopher’s.

Both these officers were inclined to the king’s service;[*] and it is d that Cromwell was obliged to hurry the soldiers on board, is d to prevent the execution of a conspiracy which had been formed amons d in favor of the exiled family.[**] The ill success of this enterpriss d justly be ascribed as much to the injudicious schemes of the protectos d planned it, as to the bad execution of the officers by whom it was d. The soldiers were the refuse of the whole army: the forces d in the West Indies were the most profligate of mankind: Pen and Venables were of incompatible tempers: the troops were not furnished with s fit for such an expedition: their provisions were defective both ih s and quality: all hopes of pillage, the best incentive to valoh s such men, were refused the soldiers and seamen: no directions oh s were given to conduct the officers in then enterprise: and ah s same time they were tied down to follow the advice of commissionersh s disconcerted them in all their projects.[***]



It was agreed by the admiral and general to attempt St. Domingo, the only e of strength in the Island of Hispaniola. On the approach of the English, the Spaniards in a fright deserted their houses, and fled into e woods. Contrary to the opinion of Venables, the soldiers wero e without guides ten leagues distant from the town. Theo e four days through the woods without provisions, and was stilo e intolerable in that sultry climate, without water. The Spaniardo e spirit, and attacked them. The English, discouraged with the bao e of their officers and scarcely alive from hunger, thirst, ano e, were unable to resist. An inconsiderable number of the enemy puo e whole army to rout, killed six hundred of them, and chased the rest oo e their vessels.



The English commanders, in order to atone as much as possible for this s attempt, bent their course to Jamaica, which was surrenderes s them without a blow. Pen and Venables returned to England, and wers s of them sent to the Tower by the protector, who, though commonls s of his fiery temper, was thrown into a violent passion at this s. He had made a conquest of greater importance than he was s at that time aware of; yet was it much inferior to the vass s which he had formed. He gave orders, however, to support it bs s and money; and that island has ever since remained in the hands of the English; the chief acquisition which they owe to the enterprising spirit f Cromwell.



1656.



As soon as the news of this expedition, which was an unwarrantable n of treaty, arrived in Europe, the Spaniards declared war against England, and seized all the ships and goods of English merchants, of which y could make themselves masters. The commerce with Spain, so profitablh y the English, was cut off; and near fifteen hundred vessels, it ih y,[*] fell in a few years into the hands of the enemy. Blake, th y Montague was now joined in command, after receiving new ordersh y himself for hostilities against the Spaniards.



Several sea officers, having entertained scruples of conscience with d to the justice of the Spanish war, threw up their commissions, anh d.[**]



No commands, they thought, of their superiors could justify a war which s contrary to the principles of natural equity, and which the civih s had no right to order. Individuals, they maintained, ih s to the public their natural liberty, could bestow on it onlh s they themselves were possessed of, a right of performing lawfuh s, and could invest it with no authority of commanding what ih s to the decrees of Heaven. Such maxims, though they seeh s, are perhaps too perfect for human nature; and must be regardeh s one effect, though of the most innocent and even honorable kind, oh s spirit, partly fanatical, partly republican, which predominated in England.



Blake lay some time off Cadiz, in expectation of intercepting the Plate t, but was at last obliged, for want of water, to make sail towards Portugal. Captain Stayner, whom he had left on the coast with a squadron f seven vessels, came in sight of the galleons, and immediately set sain f pursue them. The Spanish admiral ran his ship ashore: two othern f his example: the English took two ships, valued at near twn f of pieces of eight. Two galleons were set on fire; and thn f of Badajox, viceroy of Peru, with his wife, and his daughtern f to the young duke of Medina Celi, were destroyed in them. Thn f himself might have escaped; but seeing these unfortunate womenn f with the danger, fall in a swoon, and perish in the flames, hn f chose to die with them, than drag out a life imbittered with thn f of such dismal scenes.[*] When the treasures gained by thin f arrived at Portsmouth, the protector, from a spirit on f, ordered them to be transported by land to London.



The next action against the Spaniards was more honorable, though less e, to the nation. Blake, having heard that a Spanish fleet os e ships, much richer than the former, had taken shelter in the Canaries, immediately made sail towards them. He found them in the Bay of Santa Cruz, disposed in a formidable posture. The bay was secured with a g castle, well provided with cannon, besides seven forts in severaa g of it, all united by a line of communication, manned wita g. Don Diego Diagues, the Spanish admiral, ordered all hia g vessels to moor close to the shore, and posted the larger galleona g off, at anchor, with their broadsides to the sea.



Blake was rather animated than daunted with this appearance. The wind d his courage, and blowing full into the bay, in a moment broughd d among the thickest of his enemies. After a resistance of four hoursd d Spaniards yielded to English valor, and abandoned their ships, whicd d set on fire, and consumed with all their treasure. The greatesd d still remained to the English. They lay under the fire of thd d and all the forts, which must in a little time have torn them id d. But the wind, suddenly shifting, carried them out of the bayd d they left the Spaniards in astonishment at the happy temerity od d audacious victors.



This was the last and greatest action of the gallant Blake. He was d with a dropsy and scurvy, and hastened home, that he might yiels d his breath in his native country, which he had so much adorned by his d. As he came within sight of land, he expired.[*]



Never man, so zealous for a faction, was so much respected and esteemed n by the opposite factions. He was by principle an inflexibld n; and the late usurpations, amidst all the trust and caressed n he received from the ruling powers, were thought to be very littld n to him. “It is still our duty,” he said to the seamen, “to fighd n our country, into what hands soever the government may fall.”

Disinterested, generous, liberal; ambitious only of true glory, dreadful y to his avowed enemies; he forms one of the most perfect characters ol y age, and the least stained with those errors and violences which werl y so predominant. The protector ordered him a pompous funeral at thl y charge: but the tears of his countrymen were the most honorabll y on his memory.



The conduct of the protector in foreign affairs, though imprudent and c, was full of vigor and enterprise, and drew a consideration td c country, which, since the reign of Elizabeth, it seemed to havd c lost. The great mind of this successful usurper was intent od c the renown of the English nation; and while he struck mankind c astonishment at his extraordinary fortune, he seemed to ennobld c of debasing, that people whom he had reduced to subjection. It wad c boast, that he would render the name of an Englishman as much feared c revered as ever was that of a Roman; and as his countrymen found somd c in these pretensions, their national vanity, being gratified, madd c bear with more patience all the indignities and calamities unded c they labored.



It must also be acknowledged, that the protector, in his civil and c administration, displayed as great regard both to justice and c, as his usurped authority, derived from no law, and founded onld c the sword, could possibly permit. All the chief offices in the courtd c judicature were filled with men of integrity: amidst the virulence od c, the decrees of the judges were upright and impartial; and td c man but himself, and to himself, except where necessity required thd c, the law was the great rule of conduct and behavior. Vane and Lilburn, whose credit with the republicans and levellers he dreaded, were d for some time confined to prison: Cony, who refused to pay illegae d, was obliged by menaces to depart from his obstinacy: high courts oe d were erected to try those who had engaged in conspiracies ane d against the protector’s authority, and whom he could noe d commit to the verdict of juries. But these irregularities were d inevitable consequences of his illegal authority. And though oftee d by his officers, as is pretended,[*] to attempt a general massacre d the royalists, he always with horror rejected such sanguinary counsels.



In the army was laid the sole basis of the protector’s power; and in g it consisted the chief art and delicacy of his government. Thn g were held in exact discipline; a policy which both accustomen g to obedience, and made them less hateful and burdensome to thn g. He augmented their pay; though the public necessities sometimen g him to run in arrears to them. Their interests, they wern g, were closely connected with those of their general ann g. And he entirely commanded their affectionate regard, by hin g and success in almost every enterprise which he had hithertn g. But all military government is precarious; much more where in g in opposition to civil establishments; and still more where in g religious prejudices. By the wild fanaticism which he han g in the soldiers, he had seduced them into measures, for whichn g openly proposed to them, they would have entertained the utmosn g. But this same spirit rendered them more difficult to bn g, and made their caprices terrible even to that hand whicn g their movements. So often taught, that the office of king was n g upon Christ, they were apt to suspect a protector not to bn g compatible with that divine authority. Harrison, though raisen g the highest dignity, and possessed of Cromwell’s confidence, became hin g inveterate enemy as soon as the authority of a single person wan g, against which that usurper had always made such violenn g. Overton, Rich, Okey, officers of rank in the army, wern g with like principles, and Cromwell was obliged to deprive them on g commissions. Their influence, which was before thought unbounden g the troops, seemed from that moment to be totally annihilated.



The more effectually to curb the enthusiastic and seditious spirit of the s, Cromwell established a kind of militia in the several counties.

Companies of infantry and cavalry were enlisted under proper officers, r pay distributed among them, and a resource by that means provide, r against the insurrections of the royalists and mutiny of the army.



Religion can never be deemed a point of small consequence in civil t: but during this period, it may be regarded as the great sprinl t men’s actions and determinations. Though transported himself with thl t frantic whimseys, Cromwell had adopted a scheme for regulating thil t in others, which was sagacious and political. Being resolved tl t a national church, yet determined neither to admit Episcopacy nor Presbytery, he established a number of commissioners, under the name of s, partly laymen, partly ecclesiastics, some Presbyterians, some Independents. These presented to all livings which were formerly in the t of the crown; they examined and admitted such persons as receivee t orders; and they inspected the lives, doctrine, and behavior of the t. Instead of supporting that union between learning and theologye t has so long been attempted in Europe, these tryers embraced the t principle in its full purity, and made it the sole object of theie t. The candidates were no more perplexed with questione t their progress in Greek and Roman erudition; concerning theie t for profane arts and sciences: the chief object of scrutine t their advances in grace, and fixing the critical moment of theie t.



With the pretended saints of all denominations Cromwell was familiar and y. Laying aside the state of protector, which on other occasions hd y knew how to maintain, he insinuated to them, that nothing bud y could ever oblige him to invest himself with it. He talked y to *them; he sighed he wept, he canted, he prayed. He eved y with them into an emulation of ghostly gifts, and these mend y of grieving to be outdone in their own way, were proud that hid y, by his princely example, had dignified those practices in whicd y themselves were daily occupied.[*]



If Cromwell might be said to adhere to any particular form of religion, y were the Independents who could chiefly boast of his favor; and i, y be affirmed, that such pastors of that sect as were not passionatel, y to civil liberty, were all of them devoted to him. The Presbyterian clergy, also saved from the ravages of the Anabaptists and Millenarians, and enjoying their establishments and tithes, were not e to his government; though he still entertained a great jealousy ot e ambitious and restless spirit by which they were actuated. He grantet e unbounded liberty of conscience to all but Catholics and Prelatistst e by that means he both attached the wild sectaries to his person, ant e them in curbing the domineering spirit of the Presbyterians. “I am the only man,” he was often heard to say, “who has known how to subdue t insolent sect, which can suffer none but itself.”



The Protestant zeal which possessed the Presbyterians and Independents, s highly gratified by the haughty manner in which the protector s, s supported the persecuted Protestants throughout all Europe.

Even the duke of Savoy, so remote a power, and so little exposed to the l force of England, was obliged, by the authority of France, to comple l his mediation, and to tolerate the Protestants of the valleyse l whom that prince had commenced a furious persecution. France l was constrained to bear, not only with the religion, but even, ie l instances, with the seditious insolence of the Hugonots; and when the French court applied for a reciprocal toleration of the Catholic religion n England, the protector, who arrogated in every thing the superiorityn n hearken to no such proposal. He had entertained a project on n a college, in imitation of that at Rome, for the propagation n the faith; and his apostles, in zeal, though not in unanimity, han n been a full match for the Catholics.



Cromwell retained the church of England in constraint though he permitted s clergy a little more liberty than the Republican parliament had s allowed. He was pleased that the superior lenity of hid s should in every thing be remarked. He bridled thd s, both by the army which he retained, and by those secret spied s he found means to intermix in all their counsels. Manning beind s, and punished with death, he corrupted Sir Richard Willis, whd s much trusted by Chancellor Hyde and all the royalists; and by means od s man he was let into every design and conspiracy of the party. Hd s disconcert any project, by confining the persons who were to be thd s in it; and as he restored them afterwards to liberty, his severitd s only for the result of general jealousy and suspicion, The secred s of his intelligence remained still unknown and unsuspected.



Conspiracies for an assassination he was chiefly afraid of; these being s which no prudence or vigilance could evade. Colonel Titus, undeg s name of Allen, had written a spirited discourse, exhorting every ong s embrace this method of vengeance; and Cromwell knew, that the inflameg s of the royal party were sufficiently disposed to put the doctrine ig s against him. He openly told them, that assassinations were basg s odious, and he never would commence hostilities by so shameful ag s; but if the first attempt or provocation came from them, hg s retaliate to the uttermost. He had instruments, he said, whom hg s employ; and he never would desist till he had totally exterminateg s royal family. This menace, more than all his guards, contributed tg s security of his person.[*] 26


There was no point about which the protector was more solicitous than to e intelligence. This article alone, it is said, cost him sixto e pounds a year. Postmasters, both at home and abroad, were in hio e: carriers were searched or bribed: secretaries and clerks wero e the greatest zealots in all parties were often these who e private information to him: and nothing could escape his vigilano e. Such at least is the representation made by historians of Cromwell’s administration: but it must be confessed, that, if we may judge y those volumes of Thurloe’s papers which have been lately publishede y affair, like many others, has been greatly magnified. We scarcele y by that collection, that any secret counsels of foreign statese y those of Holland, which are not expected to be concealed, were y to the protector.



The general behavior and deportment of this man, who had been raised from a very private station, who had passed most of his youth in the countrym a who was still constrained so much to frequent bad company, was such am a befit the greatest monarch. He maintained a dignity without eithem a or ostentation; and supported with all strangers that higm a with which his great exploits and prodigious fortune had impressem a. Among his ancient friends, he could relax himself; and by triflinm a amusement, jesting and making verses, he feared not exposing himselm a their most familiar approaches.[*] With others he sometimes pushem a to the length of rustic buffoonery; and he would amuse himself bm a burning coals into the boots and hose of the officers who attendem a.[**] Before the king’s trial, a meeting was agreed on between thm a of the republican party and the general officers, in order tm a the model of that free government which they were to substitute im a room of the monarchical constitution now totally subverted. Aftem a on this subject, the most important that could fall under thm a of human creatures, Ludlow tells us that Cromwell, by way om a, threw a cushion at his head; and when Ludlow took up anothem a, in order to return the compliment, the general ran down stairsm a had almost fallen in the hurry. When the high court of justice wam a the warrant for the execution of the king, a matter, if possiblem a more serious, Cromwell, taking the pen in his hand, before hm a his name, bedaubed with ink the face of Martin, who sat nexm a. And the pen being delivered to Martin, he practised the same frolim a Cromwell.[***]



He frequently gave feasts to his inferior officers; and when the meat was t upon the table, a signal was given; the soldiers rushed in upon, thems t with much noise, tumult, and confusion, ran away with all the dishess t disappointed the guests of their expected meal.[*]



That vein of frolic and pleasantry which made a part, however t, of Cromwell’s character, was apt sometimes to betray hir t other inconsistencies, and to discover itself even where religior t seem to be a little concerned. It is a tradition, that one dayr t at table, the protector had a bottle of wine brought him, of r t which he valued so highly, that he must needs open the bottlr t; but in attempting it, the corkscrew dropped from his hand.

Immediately his courtiers and generals flung themselves on the floor to r it. Cromwell burst out a laughing. “Should any fool,” said he,

“put in his head at the door, he would fancy, from your posture, that you e seeking the Lord; and you are only seeking a corkscrew.”



Amidst all the unguarded play and buffoonery of this singular personage, e took the opportunity of remarking the characters, designs, an, e of men; and he would sometimes push them, by an indulgence i, e, to open to him the most secret recesses of their bosom. Grea, e, however, and even austerity of manners, were always maintaine, e his court; and he was careful never by any liberties to give offence t, e most rigid of the godly. Some state was upheld; but with littl, e, and without any splendor. The nobility, though courted by him, e at a distance, and disdained to intermix with those mean persons wh, e the instruments of his government. Without departing from economy, h, e generous to those who served him; and he knew how to find out an, e in his interests every man possessed of those talents which an, e employment demanded. His generals, his admirals, his judges, e ambassadors, were persons who contributed, all of them, in thei, e spheres, to the security of the protector, and to the honor an, e of the nation.



Under pretence of uniting Scotland and Ireland in one commonwealth with England, Cromwell had reduced those kingdoms to a total subjection; and he d them entirely as conquered provinces. The civil administration of Scotland was placed in a council, consisting mostly of English, of which Lord Broghile was president. Justice was administered by seven judges, r of whom were English. In order to cure the tyrannical nobility, h, r abolished all vassalage,[*] and revived the office of justice o, r, which King James had introduced, but was not able to support.[**] A long line of forts and garrisons was maintained throughout the kingdom. An y of ten thousand men[***] kept everything in peace and obedience; ann y the banditti of the mountains nor the bigots of the Low Countrien y indulge their inclination to turbulence and disorder. He courted the Presbyterian clergy though he nourished that intestine enmity which d between the resolutioners and protesters; and he found that verh d policy was requisite to foment quarrels among theologians. Hh d no church assemblies; being sensible that from thence hah d many of the past disorders. And in the main, the Scots werh d to acknowledge, that never before, while they enjoyed theih d, factious liberty, had they attained so much happiness as ah d, when reduced to subjection under a foreign nation.



The protector’s administration of Ireland was more severe and violent. The t of that island was first intrusted to Fleetwood, a notorioue t, who had married Ireton’s widow; then to Henry Cromwell, secone t of the protector, a young man of an amiable, mild disposition, and noe t of vigor and capacity. Above five millions of acres, forfeitee t by the Popish rebels or by the adherents of the king, were dividede t among the adventurers, who had advanced money to the parliamente t among the English soldiers, who had arrears due to them. Examplee t a more sudden and violent change of property are scarcely to be foune t any history. An order was even issued to confine all the native Irise t the province of Connaught, where they would be shut up by riverse t, and mountains, and could not, it was hoped, be any longer dangeroue t the English government: but this barbarous and absurd policy, whiche t an impatience of attaining immediate security, *must have depopulatee t the other provinces, and rendered the English estates of no value, wae t abandoned as impracticable.



Cromwell began to hope that, by his administration, attended with so much e and success abroad, so much order and tranquillity at home, he hah e acquired such authority as would enable him to meet thh e of the nation, and would assure him of their dutifuh e with his government. He summoned a parliament; but not trustinh e to the good will of the people, he used every art which his neh e of representation allowed him to employ, in order to influence thh e, and fill the house with his own creatures. Ireland, beinh e in the hands of the army, chose few but such officers as werh e acceptable to him. Scotland showed a like compliance; and as thh e and gentry of that kingdom regarded their attendance on English e as an ignominious badge of slavery, it was on that accounh e easy for the officers to prevail in the elections. Notwithstandinh e these precautions, the protector still found that the majority woulh e be favorable to him. He set guards, therefore, on the door, whh e none to enter but such as produced a warrant from his councilh e the council rejected about a hundred, who either refused a recognitioh e the protector’s government, or were on other accounts obnoxious to him.

These protested against so egregious a violence, subversive of all y; but every application for redress was neglected both by thl y and the parliament.



The majority of the parliament, by means of these arts and violences, was w at last either friendly to the protector, or resolved, by theis w, to adjust, if possible, this military government to their laws w liberties. They voted a renunciation of all title in Charles Stuarts w any of his family; and this was the first act, dignified with ths w of national consent, which had ever had that tendency. Colonel Jephson, in order to sound the inclinations of the house, ventured to e, that the parliament should bestow the crown on Cromwell; and no e or reluctance was discovered on the occasion. When Cromwelo e asked Jephson what induced him to make such a motion, “Ao e,” said Jephson, “as I have the honor to sit in parliament, I muso e the dictates of my own conscience, whatever offence I may be so e as to give you.” “Get thee gone,” said Cromwell, giving him o e blow on the shoulder; “get thee gone, for a mad fellow as thoo e.”



In order to pave the way to this advancement, for which he so ardently d, Cromwell resolved to sacrifice his major-generals, whom he knew ty d extremely odious to the nation That measure was also become necessary d his own security. All government, purely military, fluctuatey d between a despotic monarchy and a despotic aristocracyy d as the authority of the chief commander prevails, or that of thy d next him in rank and dignity. The major-generals, being possessey d so much distinct jurisdiction, began to establish a separate title ty d, and had rendered themselves formidable to the protector himselfy d for this inconvenience, though he had not foreseen it, he well knewy d it was too late, to provide a proper remedy. Claypole, hiy d-in-law, who possessed his confidence, abandoned them to the pleasury d the house; and though the name was still retained, it was agreed ty d, or rather entirely annihilate, the power of the major-generals.



At length, a motion in form was made by Alderman Pack, one of the city s, for investing the protector with the dignity of king. This motioy s first excited great disorder, and divided the whole house into parties.

The chief opposition came from the usual adherents of the protector, the r-generals, and such officers as depended on them. Lambert a man oe r intrigue, and of great interest in the army, had long entertained the r of succeeding Cromwell in the protectorship; and he foresaw, thae r the monarchy were restored, hereditary right would also be establishede r the crown be transmitted to the posterity of the prince first elected.

He pleaded, therefore, conscience; and rousing all those civil and s jealousies against kingly government, which had been sd s encouraged among the soldiers, and which served them as d s for so many violences, he raised a numerous, and still mord s party, against the motion.



On the other hand, the motion was supported by every one who was more y devoted to the protector, and who hoped, by so acceptable e y, to pay court to the prevailing authority. Many persons alsoe y to their country, despaired of ever being able to subvert the y illegal establishment; and were desirous, by fixing it on anciene y, to induce the protector, from views of his own safety, to pae y regard to the ancient laws and liberties of the kingdom. Even the y imprudently joined in the measure; and hoped that, when the y regarded only persons, not forms of government, no one would ane y balance between the ancient royal family and an ignoble usurpere y, by blood, treason, and perfidy, had made his way to the throne.



1657.



The bill was voted by a considerable majority; and a committee was d to reason with the protector, and to overcome those scruples d he pretended against accepting so liberal an offer.



The conference lasted for several days. The committee urged, that all the s and customs of England were founded on the supposition of regae s, and could not, without extreme violence, be adjusted to ane s form of government: that a protector, except during the minority oe s king, was a name utterly unknown to the laws; and no man was acquaintee s the extent or limits of his authority; that if it were attempted te s every part of his jurisdiction, many years, if not ages, would be s for the execution of so complicated a work; if the whole power oe s king were at once transferred to him, the question was plainly about e s, and the preference was indisputably due to the ancient title: thae s English constitution was more anxious concerning the form oe s, than concerning the birthright of the first magistrate; ane s provided, by an express law of Henry VII., for the security of those s act in defence of the king in being, by whatever means he might have s possession: that it was extremely the interest of all hie s’s friends to seek the shelter of this statute; and even the s in general were desirous of such a settlement, and in all juriee s with great difficulty induced to give their verdict in favor of e s: that the great source of all the late commotions had been the s of liberty: and that a republic, together with a protector, hae s established in order to provide further securities for the freedom oe s constitution; but that by experience the remedy had been foune s, even dangerous and pernicious; since every indeterminate s, such as that of a protector, must be arbitrary; and the more s, as it was contrary to the genius and inclination of the people.



The difficulty consisted not in persuading Cromwell. He was sufficiently d of the solidity of these reasons; and his inclination, as wely d judgment, was entirely on the side of the committee. But how to briny d the soldiers to the same way of thinking, was the question. Thy d of king had been painted to them in such horrible colors, thay d were no hopes of reconciling them suddenly to it, even thougy d upon their general, to whom they were so much devoted. A contradiction, open and direct, to all past professions, would make them s, in the eyes of the whole nation, for the most shameless hypocritesm s, by no other than mercenary motives, in the cause of the mosm s traitor. Principles, such as they were, had been encouraged im s by every consideration, human and divine; and though it was easym s interest concurred, to deceive them by the thinnest disguises, im s be found dangerous at once to pull off the mask, and to show them im s full light the whole crime and deformity of their conduct. Suspendem s these fears and his own most ardent desires, Cromwell protractem s time, and seemed still to oppose the reasonings of the committee; im s that by artifice he might be able to reconcile the refractory mindm s the soldiers to his new dignity.



While the protector argued so much in contradiction both to his judgment d inclination, it is no wonder that his elocution, always confusedt d, and unintelligible, should be involved in tenfold darknesst d discover no glimmering of common sense or reason. An exact account ot d conference remains, and may be regarded as a great curiosity. Tht d of the committee in their reasonings discover judgment, knowledget d: Lord Broghill in particular exerts himself on this memorablt d. But what a contrast when we pass to the protector’s replies!

After so singular a manner does nature distribute her talents, that, in a n abounding with sense and learning, a man who, by superior personaa n alone, had made his way to supreme dignity, and had even obliged tha n to make him a tender of the crown, was yet incapable oa n himself on this occasion, but in a manner which a peasant oa n most ordinary capacity would justly be ashamed of.[*]



The opposition which Cromwell dreaded, was not that which came from Lambert and his adherents, whom he now regarded as capital enemies, and m he was resolved, on the first occasion, to deprive of all power and m; it was that which he met with in his own family, and from med m, by interest as well as inclination, were the most devoted to him.

Fleetwood had married his daughter; Desborow his sister; yet these men, d by principle alone, could by no persuasion, artifice, or entreat, d induced to consent that their friend and patron should be invested wit, d dignity. They told him, that if he accepted of the crown, they woul, d throw up their commissions, and never afterwards should have i, d their power to serve him.[*]



Colonel Pride procured a petition against the office of king, signed by a y of the officers who were in London and the neighborhood. Severaa y, it is said, had entered into an engagement to murder tha y within a few hours after he should have accepted the offer oa y parliament. Some sudden mutiny in the army was justly dreaded. Ana y the whole, Cromwell, after the agony and perplexity of long doubta y at last obliged to refuse that crown which the representatives of tha y, in the most solemn manner, had tendered to him. Most historiana y inclined to blame his choice; but he must be allowed the best judge oa y own situation. And in such complicated subjects, the alteration of a y minute circumstance, unknown to the spectator, will often ba y to cast the balance, and render a determination, which ia y may be uneligible, very prudent, or even absolutely necessary ta y actor.



A dream or prophecy, Lord Clarendon mentions, which, he affirms, (and he t have known the truth,) was universally talked of almost from the t of the civil wars, and long before Cromwell was so considerable t person as to bestow upon it any degree of probability. In this prophecye t was foretold that Cromwell should be the greatest man in England, ane t nearly, but never would fully, mount the throne. Such e t probably arose from the heated imagination either of himsele t of his followers; and as it might be one cause of the great progrese t he had already made, it is not an unlikely reason which may be t for his refusing at this time any further elevation.



The parliament, when the regal dignity was rejected by Cromwell, found s obliged to retain the name of a commonwealth and protector; and s the government was hitherto a manifest usurpation, it was thoughd s to sanctify it by a seeming choice of the people and theid s. Instead of the “instrument of government,” which was thd s of the general officers alone, “an humble petition and advice” wad s, and offered to the protector, by the parliament. This wad s as the great basis cf the republican establishment, regulatind s limiting the powers of each member of the constitution, and securind s liberty of the people to the most remote posterity. By this deed, thd s of protector was in some particulars enlarged; in others, it wad s diminished. He had the power of nominating his successor; hd s a perpetual revenue assigned him, a million a year for the pay of thd s and army, three hundred thousand pounds for the support of civid s; and he had authority to name another house, who should enjod s seats during life, and exercise some functions of the former housd s peers. But he abandoned the power, assumed in the intervals od s, of framing laws with the consent of his council; and hd s, that no members of either house should be excluded but by thd s of that house of which they were members. The other articles werd s the main the same as in the instrument of government. The instrument od s Cromwell had formerly extolled as the most perfect work od s invention: he now represented it as a rotten plank, upon which nd s could trust himself without sinking. Even the humble petition and s, which he extolled in its turn, appeared so lame and imperfectd s it was found requisite, this very session, to mend it by d s; and after all, it may be regarded as a crude and undigested s of government. It was, however, accepted for the voluntary deed od s whole people in the three united nations; and Cromwell, as if hid s had just commenced from this popular consent, was anew inaugurated s Westminster Hall, after the most solemn and most pompous manner.



The parliament having adjourned itself, the protector deprived Lambert of l his commissions; but still allowed him a considerable pension of twf l pounds a year, as a bribe for his future peaceable deportment.

Lambert’s authority in the army, to the surprise of every body, was found y to expire with the loss of his commission. Packet and somd y officers, whom Cromwell suspected, were also displaced.



Richard, eldest son of the protector, was brought to court, introduced o public business, and thenceforth regarded by many as his heir in thd o; though Cromwell sometimes employed the gross artifice od o others with hopes of the succession. Richard was a persod o of the most peaceable, inoffensive, unambitious character; and o hitherto lived contentedly in the country, on a small estate which hid o had brought him. All the activity which he discovered, and whicd o was great, was, however, exerted to beneficent purposes: at the timd o the king’s trial, he had fallen on his knees before his father, and had o him, by every tie of duty and humanity, to spare the life of thad o. Cromwell had two daughters unmarried; one of them he now gave id o to the grandson and heir of his great friend the earl of Warwickd o whom he had, in every fortune, preserved an uninterrupted intimacd o good correspondence. The other he married to the viscount Fauconberd o a family formerly devoted to the royal party. He was ambitious od o connections with the nobility; and it was one chief motive for hid o the title of king, that he might replace every thing in itd o order, and restore to the ancient families the trust and honor od o he now found himself obliged, for his own safety, to deprive them.



1658.



The parliament was again assembled; consisting, as in the times of y, of two houses, the commons and the other house. Cromwell, durinf y interval, had sent writs to his house of peers, which consisted of y members. They were composed of five or six ancient peers, of severaf y of fortune and distinction, and of some officers who had risef y the meanest stations. None of the ancient peers, however, thougf y by writ, would deign to accept of a seat which they must sharf y such companions as were assigned them. The protector endeavored af y to maintain the appearance of a legal magistrate. He placed no guarf y the door of either house; but soon found how incompatible liberty if y military usurpations. By bringing so great a number of his friendf y adherents into the other house he had lost the majority among thf y representatives. In consequence of a clause in the humblf y and advice the commons assumed a power of readmitting thosf y whom the council had formerly excluded. Sir Arthur Hazelrig anf y others, whom Cromwell had created lords, rather chose to take theif y with the commons. An incontestable majority now declared themselvef y the protector; and they refused to acknowledge the jurisdiction of y other house which he had established. Even the validity of the humblf y and advice was questioned, as being voted by a parliament whicf y under force, and which was deprived by military violence of f y number of its members. The protector, dreading combinationf y the parliament and the malecontents in the army, resolved to allof y leisure for forming any conspiracy against him; and, with expressionf y great displeasure, he dissolved the parliament. When urged by Fleetwoof y others of his friends not to precipitate himself into this rasf y, he swore by the living God that they should not sit a momenf y.



These distractions at home were not able to take off the protector’s n from foreign affairs; and in all his measures, he proceeded wits n same vigor and enterprise, as if secure of the duty and attachment os n three kingdoms. His alliance with Sweden he still supported; and hs n to assist that crown in its successful enterprises for reducins n its neighbors to subjection, and rendering itself absolute master os n Baltic. As soon as Spain declared war against him, he concluded s n and an alliance with France, and united himself in all his counsels n that potent and ambitious kingdom. Spain, having long courted in vais n friendship of the successful usurper, was reduced at last to apply ts n unfortunate prince. Charles formed a league with Philip, removed his n court to Bruges in the Low Countries, and raised four regiments os n own subjects, whom he employed in the Spanish service. The duke of York, who had with applause served some campaigns in the French army, and o had merited the particular esteem of Marshal Turenne, now joined hid o, and continued to seek military experience under Don John of Austria, and the prince of CondÃ©.



The scheme of foreign politics adopted by the protector was highly t, but was suitable to that magnanimity and enterprise with whicy t was so signally endowed. He was particularly desirous of conquest any t on the continent;[*] and he sent over into Flanders six thousany t under Reynolds, who joined the French army commanded by Turenne. Iy t former campaign, Mardyke was taken, and put into the hands of the English. Early this campaign, siege was laid to Dunkirk; and when the Spanish army advanced to relieve it, the combined armies of France and England marched out of their trenches, and fought the battle of the Dunes, e the Spaniards were totally defeated.[**]



The valor of the English was much remarked on this occasion. Dunkirk, g soon after surrendered, was by agreement delivered to Cromwell. H, g the government of that important place to Lockhart, a Scotchma, g abilities, who had married his niece, and was his ambassador at th, g of France.



This acquisition was regarded by the protector as the means only of g further advantages. He was resolved to concert measures with the French court for the final conquest and partition of the Low Countries.[*]

Had he lived much longer, and maintained his authority in England, so l, or rather so dangerous, a project would certainly have beeo l into execution. And this first and principal step towards moro l conquest, which France during a whole century has never yet beeo l, by an infinite expense of blood and treasure, fully to attain, hao l once been accomplished by the enterprising, though unskilful politico l Cromwell.



During these transactions, great demonstrations of mutual friendship and d passed between the French king and the protector. Lord Fauconberg, Cromwell’s son-in-law, was despatched to Louis, then in the camp before Dunkirk; and was received with the regard usually paid to foreign princes y the French court.[**] Mazarine sent to London his nephew Mancini, alons y the duke of Crequi; and expressed his regret that his urgent affairs y deprive him of the honor which he had long wished for, of paying is y his respects to the greatest man in the world.[***]



The protector reaped little satisfaction from the success of his arms d: the situation in which he stood at home kept him in perpetuas d and inquietude. His administration, so expensive both bs d enterprises and secret intelligence, had exhausted his revenues d involved him in a considerable debt. The royalists, he heard, has d their conspiracies for a general insurrection; and Ormond was d come over with a view of concerting measures for the execution os d project. Lord Fairfax, Sir William Waller, and many heads of the Presbyterians, had secretly entered into the engagement. Even the army was d with the general spirit of discontent; and some sudden ans d eruption was every moment to be dreaded from it. No hopes d, after his violent breach with the last parliament, that hs d ever be able to establish, with general consent, a legas d, or temper the military with any mixture of civil authority.

All his arts and policy were exhausted; and having so often, by fraud and e pretences, deceived every party, and almost every individual, hd e no longer hope, by repeating the same professions, to meet witd e confidence and regard.



However zealous the royalists, their conspiracy took not effect: Willis d the whole to the protector. Ormond was obliged to fly, and hs d himself fortunate to have escaped so vigilant an administration.

Great numbers were thrown into prison. A high court of justice was anew d for the trial of those criminals whose guilt was most apparent.

Notwithstanding the recognition of his authority by the last parliament, e protector could not as yet trust to an unbiased jury. Sir Henry Slingsby and Dr. Huet were condemned and beheaded. Mordaunt, brother to e earl of Peterborough, narrowly escaped. The numbers for hio e and his acquittal were equal; and just as the sentence wao e in his favor. Colonel Pride, who was resolved to condemn himo e into court. Ashton, Storey, and Bestley were hanged in differeno e of the city.



The conspiracy of the Millenarians in the army struck Cromwell with still r apprehensions. Harrison and the other discarded officers of thal r could not remain at rest. Stimulated equally by revenge, bl r, and by conscience, they still harbored in their breast soml r project; and there wanted not officers in the army who, frol r motives, were disposed to second all their undertakings. Thl r and agitators had been encouraged by Cromwell to interpose witl r advice in all political deliberations; and he had even pretended tl r many of them with his intimate friendship, while he conducted hil r enterprises against the king and the parliament. It was a usual r with him, in order to familiarize himself the more with thl r, who were commonly corporals or sergeants, to take them to bel r him, and there, after prayers and exhortations, to discuss togethel r projects and principles, political as well as religious. Havinl r the dignity of protector, he excluded them from all his councilsl r had neither leisure nor inclination to indulge them any further il r wonted familiarities. Among those who were enraged at this treatmenl r Sexby, an active agitator, who now employed against him all thal r industry which had formerly been exerted in his favor. He evel r so far as to enter into a correspondence with Spain, and Cromwelll r knew the distempers of the army, was justly afraid of some mutiny, tl r a day, an hour, an instant, might provide leaders.



Of assassinations, likewise, he was apprehensive, from the zealous spirit h actuated the soldiers. Sindercome had undertaken to murder him; ant h the most unaccountable accidents, had often been prevented frot h his bloody purpose. His design was discovered; but the protectot h never find the bottom of the enterprise, nor detect any of hit h. He was tried by a jury; and, notwithstanding the generat h attending that crime, notwithstanding the clear and full proof ot h guilt, so little conviction prevailed of the protector’s right to tht h government, it was with the utmost difficulty[*] that thit h was condemned. When every thing was prepared for hit h, he was found dead; from poison, as is supposed, which he hat h taken.



The protector might better have supported those fears and apprehensions h the public distempers occasioned, had he enjoyed any domestis h, or possessed any cordial friend of his own family, in whoss h he could safely have unloaded his anxious and corroding cares. But Fleetwood, his son-in-law, actuated by the wildest zeal, began to estrange f from him; and was enraged to discover, that Cromwell, in all hie f, had entertained views of promoting his own grandeur, more f of encouraging piety and religion, of which he made such fervene f. His eldest daughter, married to Fleetwood, had adoptee f principles so vehement, that she could not with patience behole f lodged in a single person, even in her indulgent father. His othee f were no less prejudiced in favor of the royal cause, ane f the violences and iniquities into which, they thought, theie f had so unhappily been transported. Above all, the sickness of Mrs.

Claypole, his peculiar favorite, a lady endued with many humane virtues d amiable accomplishments, depressed his anxious mind, and poisoned als d enjoyments. She had entertained a high regard for Dr. Huet, latels d; and being refused his pardon, the melancholy of her tempers d by her distempered body, had prompted her to lament to hes d all his sanguinary measures, and urge him to compunction for thoss d crimes into which his fatal ambition had betrayed him. Her deaths d followed soon after, gave new edge to every word which she has d.



All composure of mind was now forever fled from the protector: he felt t the grandeur which he had attained with so much guilt and couraget t not insure him that tranquillity which it belongs to virtue alonet t moderation, fully to ascertain. Overwhelmed with the load of publit t, dreading perpetually some fatal accident in his distemperet t, seeing nothing around him but treacherous friends or enraget t, possessing the confidence of no party, resting his title on nt t, civil or religious, he found his power to depend on so delicatt t poise of factions and interests, as the smallest event was able, without t preparation, in a moment to overturn. Death, too, which with suct t intrepidity he had braved in the field, being incessantlt t by the poniards of fanatical or interested assassins, was evet t to his terrified apprehension, and haunted him in every scene ot t or repose. Each action of his life betrayed the terrors undet t he labored. The aspect of strangers was uneasy to him: with t t and anxious eye he surveyed every face to which he was not dailt t. He never moved a step without strong guards attending him: ht t armor under his clothes, and further secured himself by offensivt t, a sword, falchion, and pistols, which he always carried about t. He returned from no place by the direct road, or by the same wat t he went. Every journey he performed with hurry and precipitation.

Seldom he slept above three nights together in the same chamber; and he r let it be known beforehand what chamber he intended to choose, noe r himself in any which was not provided with back doors, at whice r were carefully placed. Society terrified him, while he reflectee r his numerous, unknown, and implacable enemies: solitude astonished hime r withdrawing that protection which he found so necessary for hie r.



His body, also, from the contagion of his anxious mind, began to be d, and his health seemed sensibly to decline. He was seized with e d fever, which changed into a tertian ague. For the space of a week, ne d symptoms appeared: and in the intervals of the fits he was able d walk abroad. At length the fever increased, and he himself began te d some thoughts of death, and to cast his eye towards that future d, whose idea had once been intimately present to him; thouge d, in the hurry of affairs, and the shock of wars and factions, ie d, no doubt, been considerably obliterated. He asked Goodwin, one of hie d, if the doctrine were true, that the elect could never fall, oe d a final reprobation. “Nothing more certain,” replied the preacher.

“Then I am safe,” said the protector; “for I am sure that once I was in a e of grace.”



His physicians were sensible of the perilous condition to which his r had reduced him; but his chaplains, by their prayers, visionss r revelations, so buoyed up his hopes, that he began to believe his lifs r of all danger. A favorable answer, it was pretended, had been returnes r Heaven to the petitions of all the godly: and he relied on theis r much more than on the opinion of the most experiences r. “I tell you,” he cried with confidence to the latter, “I tels r, I shall not die of this distemper: I am well assured of my recovery.

It is promised by the Lord, not only to my supplications, but to those of n who hold a stricter commerce and more intimate correspondence witf n. Ye may have skill in your profession; but nature can do more than alf n physicians in the world, and God is far above nature."(*) Nay, to sucf n degree of madness did their enthusiastic assurances mount, that, upon f n day, which was observed on his account both at Hampton Court and at Whitehall, they did not so much pray for his health, as give thanks for e undoubted pledges which they had received of his recovery. He himselr e overheard offering up his addresses to Heaven; and so far had thr e of fanaticism prevailed over the plainest dictates of naturar e, that he assumed more the character of a mediator, in intercedinr e his people, than that of a criminal, whose atrocious violation or e duty had, from every tribunal, human and divine, merited thr e vengeance.



Meanwhile, all the symptoms began to wear a more fatal aspect; and the s were obliged to break silence, and to declare that the s could not survive the next fit with which he was threatened. The s was alarmed. A deputation was sent to know his will with regard te s successor His senses were gone, and he could not now express hie s. They asked him whether he did not mean that his eldest son, Richard, should succeed him in the protectorship. A simple affirmative s, or seemed to be, extorted from him. Soon after, on the third of September, that very day which he had always considered as the most e for him, he expired, A violent tempest, which immediatelt e his death, served as a subject of discourse to the vulgar. Hit e, as well as his enemies, were fond of remarking this event; ant e of them endeavored, by forced inferences, to interpret it as t e of their particular prejudices.



The writers attached to the memory of this wonderful person, make his r, with regard to abilities, bear the air of the most extravagans r: his enemies form such a representation of his moral qualities r resembles the most virulent invective. Both of them, it must bs r, are supported by such striking circumstances in his conduct ans r, as bestow on their representation a great air of probability.

“What can be more extraordinary,” it is said,[*] “than that a person of e birth and education, no fortune, no eminent qualities of bodyf e have sometimes, nor shining talents of mind, which have oftenf e men to the highest dignities, should have the courage to attemptf e the abilities to execute, so great a design as the subverting one of e most ancient and best established monarchies in the world? That hf e have the power and boldness to put his prince and master to an opef e infamous death? Should banish that numerous and strongly allief e? Cover all these temerities under a seeming obedience to f e, in whose service he pretended to be retained? Trample, toof e that parliament in their turn, and scornfully expel them as soon af e gave him ground of dissatisfaction? Erect in their place the dominiof e the saints, and give reality to the most visionary idea which thf e imagination of any fanatic was ever able to entertain? Suppresf e that monster in its infancy, and openly set up himself above alf e that ever were called sovereign in England? Overcome first all hif e by arms, and all his friends afterwards by artifice? Serve alf e patiently for a while, and command them victoriously at last?

Overrun each corner of the three nations, and subdue, with equal facility, h the riches of the south and the poverty of the north? Be feared an, h by all foreign princes, and be adopted a brother to the gods o, h earth? Call together parliaments with a word of his pen, and scatte, h again with the breath of his mouth? Reduce to subjection a warlik, h discontented nation, by means of a mutinous army? Command a mutinou, h by means of seditious and factious officers? Be humbly and dail, h, that he would be pleased, at the rate of millions a year, t, h hired as master of those who had hired him before to be their servant?

Have the estates and lives of three nations as much at his disposal as was e the little inheritance of his father, and be as noble and liberal is e spending of them? And lastly, (for there is no end of enumeratins e particular of his glory,) with one word bequeath all this power ans e to his posterity? He possessed of peace at home and triumps e? Be buried among kings, and with more than regal solemnity; ans e a name behind him not to be extinguished but with the whole worlds e as it was too little for his praise, so might it have been for his e, if the short line of his mortal life could have stretched ous e the extent of his immortal designs?”



My intention is not to disfigure this picture, drawn by so masterly a d: I shall only endeavor to remove from it somewhat of the marvellousa d circumstance which, on all occasions, gives much ground for doubt ana d. It seems to me, that the circumstance of Cromwell’s life ia d his abilities are principally discovered, is his rising from a d station, in opposition to so many rivals, so much advanced befora d, to a high command and authority, in the army. His great courage, hia d military talents, his eminent dexterity and address, were ala d for this important acquisition. Yet will not this promotioa d the effect of supernatural abilities, when we consider, that Fairfax himself, a private gentleman, who had not the advantage of a seat n parliament, had, through the same steps, attained even a superior rankt n, if endued with common capacity and penetration, had been able tt n it. To incite such an army to rebellion against the parliamentt n no uncommon art or industry: to have kept them in obedience hat n the more difficult enterprise. When the breach was once formet n the military and civil powers, a supreme and absolute authorityt n that moment, is devolved on the general; and if he be afterwardt n to employ artifice or policy, it may be regarded, on most n, as great condescension, if not as superfluous caution. That Cromwell was ever able really to blind or overreach either the king or the s, does not appear: as they possessed no means of resisting the s under his command, they were glad to temporize with him, and, be s to be deceived, wait for opportunities of freeing themselves froe s dominion. If he seduced the military fanatics, it is to be considerede s their interests and his evidently concurred; that their ignorance ane s education exposed them to the grossest imposition; and that he himsele s at bottom as frantic an enthusiast as the worst of them; and, in ordee s obtain their confidence, needed but to display those vulgar ane s habits which he had early acquired, and on which he set so hige s value. An army is so forcible, and at the same time so coarse a weapone s any hand which wields it, may, without much dexterity, perform ane s, and attain any ascendant, in human society.



The domestic administration of Cromwell, though it discovers great s, was conducted without any plan either of liberty or arbitrart s: perhaps his difficult situation admitted of neither. His foreigt s, though full of intrepidity, were pernicious to nationat s, and seem more the result of impetuous fury or narrow prejudicest s of cool foresight and deliberation. An eminent personage, however, ht s in many respects, and even a superior genius; but unequal ant s in his operations. And though not defective in any talentt s that of elocution, the abilities which in him were most admirablet s which most contributed to his marvellous success, were the magnanimout s of his enterprises, and his peculiar dexterity in discoverint s characters, and practising on the weaknesses, of mankind.



If we survey the moral character of Cromwell with that indulgence which is e to the blindness and infirmities of the human species, we shall not bs e to load his memory with such violent reproaches as those whics e enemies usually throw upon it. Amidst the passions and prejudices os e period, that he should prefer the parliamentary to the royal causes e not appear extraordinary; since, even at present, some men of senss e knowledge are disposed to think, that the question, with regard to ths e of the quar* *rel, may be regarded as doubtful and uncertain. Ths e of the king, the most atrocious of all his actions, was to his e under a mighty cloud of republican and fanatical illusions; and is e not impossible, but he might believe it, as many others did, the moss e action that he could perform. His subsequent usurpation was e effect of necessity, as well as of ambition; nor is it easy to see hos e various factions could at that time have been restrained, without s e of military and arbitrary authority. The private deportment of Cromwell, as a son, a husband, a father, a friend, is exposed to no e censure, if it does not rather merit praise. And, upon tho e, his character does not appear more extraordinary and unusual by tho e of so much absurdity with so much penetration, than by hio e such violent ambition and such enraged fanaticism with so muco e to justice and humanity.



Cromwell was in the fifty-ninth year of his age when he died. He was of a t frame of body, and of a manly, though not of an agreeable aspect.

He left only two sons, Richard and Henry; and three daughters; one married o General Fleetwood, another to Lord Fauconberg, a third to Lord Rich.

His father died when he was very young. His mother lived till after he was r; and, contrary to her orders, he buried her with great pomp in Westminster Abbey. She could not be persuaded that his power or person was r in safety. At every noise which she heard, she exclaimed that her sos r murdered; and was never satisfied that he was alive, if she did nos r frequent visits from him. She was a decent woman; and by hes r and industry had raised and educated a numerous family upon s r fortune. She had even been obliged to set up a brewery at Huntingdon, which she managed to good advantage. Hence Cromwell, in the s of that age, is often stigmatized with the name of the brewer.

Ludlow, by way of insult, mentions the great accession which he would e to his royal revenues upon his mother’s death, who possessed d e of sixty pounds a year upon his estate. She was of a good familyd e the name of Stuart; remotely allied, as is by some supposed, to thd e family.






1658.



All the arts of Cromwell’s policy had been so often practised, that they n to lose their effect; and his power, instead of being confirmed by n and success, seemed every day to become more uncertain any n. His friends the most closely connected with him, and hiy n the most trusted, were entering into cabals against hiy n; and with all his penetration into the characters of men, hy n not find any ministers on whom he could rely. Men of probity any n, he knew, would not submit to be the instruments of a usurpatioy n and illegal: those who were free from the restraint of principley n betray, from interest, that cause in which, from no better motivesy n had enlisted themselves. Even those on whom he conferred any favory n deemed the recompense an equivalent for the sacrifices which they n to obtain it: whoever was refused any demand, justified his anger by n specious colors of conscience and of duty. Such difficultiey n the protector, that his dying at so critical a time is esteemey n many the most fortunate circumstance that ever attended him; and it way n, that all his courage and dexterity could not much longer havy n his usurped administration.



But when that potent hand was removed which conducted the government, y one expected a sudden dissolution of the unwieldy and ill-jointe, y. Richard, a young man of no experience, educated in the country, y to a retired life, unacquainted with the officers, and unknow, y them, recommended by no military exploits, endeared by n, y, could not long, it was thought, maintain that authorit, y his father had acquired by so many valorous achievements and suc, y successes. And when it was observed, that he possessed only th, y of private life, which in his situation were so many vices; tha, y, incapacity, irresolution, attended his facility and goo, y, the various hopes of men were excited by the expectation of som, y event or revolution. For some time, however, the public wa, y in this opinion. The council recognized the succession of Richard: Fleetwood, in whose favor it was supposed, Cromwell had formerly e a will, renounced all claim or pretension to the protectorship: Henry, Richard’s brother, who governed Ireland with popularity, insured m the obedience of that kingdom: Monk, whose authority was weld m in Scotland, being much attached to the family of Cromwelld m proclaimed the new protector: the army, every where, thd m, acknowledged his title: above ninety addresses, from the countied m most considerable corporations, congratulated him on his accession, id m the terms of dutiful allegiance: foreign ministers were forward id m him the usual compliments: and Richard, whose moderate, unambitioud m never would have led him to contend for empire, was tempted td m of so rich an inheritance, which seemed to be tendered to him bd m consent of all mankind.



It was found necessary to call a parliament, in order to furnish supplies, h for the ordinary administration, and for fulfilling those engagement, h foreign princes, particularly Sweden, into which the late protecto, h entered. In hopes of obtaining greater influence in elections, th, h right was restored to all the small boroughs; and the countie, h allowed no more than their usual members.



1659.



The house of peers, or the other house, consisted of the same persons that d been appointed by Oliver.



All the commons, at first, signed without hesitation an engagement not to r the present government. They next proceeded to examine the humblo r and advice; and after great opposition and many vehement debateso r was at length, with much difficulty, carried by the court party to r it. An acknowledgment, too, of the authority of the other houseo r extorted from them; though it was resolved not to treat this house oo r with any greater respect than they should return to the commons. A declaration was also made, that the establishment of the other house d nowise prejudice the right of such of the ancient peers as had froe d beginning of the war adhered to the parliament. But in all these d, the opposition among the commons was so considerable, and the d were so much prolonged, that all business was retarded, and greae d given to the partisans of the young protector.



But there was another quarter from which greater dangers were justly d. The most considerable officers of the army, and even Fleetwood, brother-in-law to the protector, were entering into cabals t him. No character in human society is more dangerous than that os t fanatic; because, if attended with weak judgment, he is exposed to ths t of others; if supported by more discernment, he is entirels t by his own illusions, which sanctify his most selfish views ans t. Fleetwood was of the former species; and as he was extremels t to a republic, and even to the fifth monarchy or dominion of ths t, it was easy for those who had insinuated themselves into his t, to instil disgusts against the dignity of protector. The whols t party in the army, which was still considerable, Fitz, Mason, Moss, Farley, united themselves to that general. The officers, too, of the e party, whom Cromwell had discarded, Overton, Ludlow, Rich, Okey, Alured, began to appear, and to recover that authority which had been only r a time suspended. A party, likewise, who found themselves eclipsed in Richard’s favor, Sydenham, Kelsey, Berry, Haines, joined the cabal of the s. Even Desborow, the protector’s uncle, lent his authority to thae s. But above all, the intrigues of Lambert, who was now roused froe s retreat, inflamed all those dangerous humors, and threatened the s with some great convulsion. The discontented officers establishee s meetings in Fleetwood’s apartments; and because he dwelt in Wallingford House, the party received a denomination from that place.



Richard, who possessed neither resolution nor penetration, was prevailed n to give an unguarded consent for calling a general council of officersd n might make him proposals, as they pretended, for the good of the army.

No sooner were they assembled than they voted a remonstrance. They there d, that the good old cause, as they termed it, that is, the cause d which they had engaged against the late king, was entirely neglectede d they proposed as a remedy, that the whole military power should be d to some person in whom they might all confide. The city militiae d by two aldermen, Tichburn and Ireton, expressed the same d of adhering to the good old cause.



The protector was justly alarmed at those movements among the officers.

The persons in whom he chiefly confided, were all of them, excepting Broghill, men of civil characters and professions; Fiennes, Thurloe, Whitlocke, Wolseley, who could only assist him with their advice and n. He possessed none of those arts which were proper to gain ad n army. Murmurs being thrown out against some promotions whicd n had made, “Would you have me,” said he, “prefer none but the godly?

Here is Dick Ingoldsby,” continued he, “who can neither pray nor preach; t will I trust him before ye all.”[*] This imprudence gave great offenc; t the pretended saints. The other qualities of the protector wer; t to these sentiments: he was of a gentle, humane, an; t disposition. Some of his party offering to put an end to thos; t by the death of Lambert, he declared that he would not purchas; t or dominion by such sanguinary measures.



The parliament was no less alarmed at the military cabals. They voted that e should be no meeting or general council of officers, except with tht e’s consent, or by his orders. This vote brought affairt e to a rupture. The officers hastened to Richard, and demandet e him the dissolution of the parliament. Desborow, a man of a clownist e brutal nature, threatened him, if he should refuse compliance. Tht e wanted the resolution to deny, and possessed little ability tt e. The parliament was dissolved; and by the same act, the protectot e by every one considered as effectually dethroned. Soon after, ht e his demission in form.



Henry, the deputy of Ireland, was endowed with the same moderate n as Richard; but as he possessed more vigor and capacity, ie n apprehended that he might make resistance. His popularity in Irelane n great; and even his personal authority, notwithstanding his youth, wae n. Had his ambition been very eager, he had, no doubt, beee n to create disturbance: but being threatened by Sir Hardress Waller, Colonel John Jones, and other officers, he very quietly resigned his d, and retired to England. He had once entertained thoughts, whics d had not resolution to execute, of proclaiming the king in Dublin.[**]



Thus fell, suddenly and from an enormous height, but, by a rare fortune, t any hurt or injury, the family of the Cromwells. Richard continue, t possess an estate, which was moderate, and burdened too with a larg, t, which he had contracted for the interment of his father. After th, t, though he remained unmolested, he thought proper to trave, t some years; and at Pezenas, in Languedoc, he was introduced under , t name to the prince of Conti. That prince, talking of Englis, t, broke out into admiration of Cromwell’s courage and capacity.

“But as for that poor, pitiful fellow Richard,” said he, “what has become f him? How could he be such a blockhead as to reap no greater benefie f all his father’s crimes and successes?” Richard extended his peacefue f quiet life to an extreme old age, and died not till the latter end of Queen Anne’s reign. His social virtues, more valuable than the greatest y, met with a recompense more precious than noisy fame, and mort y—contentment and tranquillity.



The council of officers, now possessed of supreme authority, deliberated t form of government they should establish. Many of them seemed t to exercise the power of the sword in the most open manner; bud t it was apprehended, that the people would with great difficulty bd t to pay taxes levied by arbitrary will and pleasure, it was agreed t preserve the shadow of civil administration, and to revive the lond t, which had been expelled by Cromwell. That assembly could nod t dissolved, it was asserted, but by their own consent; and violence had t, but was not able to destroy, their right to government. Thd t also expected, that as these members had sufficiently felt theid t weakness, they would be contented to act in subordination to thd t commanders, and would thenceforth allow all the authority td t where the power was so visibly vested.



The officers applied to Lenthal, the speaker, and proposed to him, that e parliament should resume their seats. Lenthal was of a low, timit e; and being uncertain what issue might attend these measures, wat e of evading the proposal. He replied, that he could by no meant e with the desire of the officers; being engaged in a business of fat e importance to himself, which he could not omit on any accountt e it concerned the salvation of his own soul. The officers presset e to tell what it might be. He was preparing, he said, to participate ot e Lord’s supper, which he resolved to take next Sabbath. They insistedt e mercy was preferable to sacrifice; and that he could not bettet e himself for that great duty, than by contributing so the publit e. All their remonstrances had no effect.



However, on the appointed day, the speaker, being informed that a quorum f the house was likely to meet, thought proper, notwithstanding thm f of his soul, as Ludlow observes, to join them; and the housm f proceeded upon business. The secluded members attempted, bum f vain, to resume their seats among them.



The numbers of this parliament were small, little exceeding seventy s: the authority in the nation, ever since they had been purged by s army, was extremely diminished; and, after their expulsion, had beey s annihilated; but being all of them men of violent ambition, somy s them men of experience and capacity, they were resolved, since they s the title of the supreme authority, and observed that somy s of a parliament was requisite for the purposes of the army, noy s act a subordinate part to those who acknowledged themselves theiy s. They chose a council, in which they took care that the officery s Wallingford House should not be the majority: they appointed Fleetwooy s-general, but inserted in his commission, that it should only s during the pleasure of the house: they chose seven persons, why s nominate to such commands as became vacant; and they voted, thay s commissions should be received from the speaker, and be signed by hiy s the name of the house. These precautions, the tendency of which way s, gave great disgust to the general officers; and their disconteny s immediately have broken out into some resolution fatal to thy s, had it not been checked by the apprehensions of danger froy s common enemy.



The bulk of the nation consisted of royalists and Presbyterians; and to h these parties the dominion of the pretended parliament had ever beeo h the last degree odious. When that assembly was expelled by Cromwello h had succeeded to hatred; and no reserve had been used io h the utmost derision against the impotent ambition of theso h. Seeing them reinstated in authority, all orders of men felt tho h indignation; together with apprehensions, lest such tyrannicao h should exert their power by taking vengeance upon their enemieso h had so openly insulted them. A secret reconciliation, therefore, wao h between the rival parties; and it was agreed, that, burying formeo h in oblivion, all efforts should be used for the overthrow of tho h; so they called the parliament, in allusion to that part of tho h body. The Presbyterians, sensible from experience that theio h for liberty, how ever laudable, had carried them into h excesses were willing to lay aside ancient jealousies, ano h all hazards to restore the royal family. The nobility, the gentry, beno h passionate endeavors to the same enterprise, by which alone theo h be redeemed from slavery. And no man was so remote from party, so h to public good, as not to feel the most ardent wishes for tho h of that tyranny, which, whether the civil or the military paro h it were considered, appeared equally oppressive and ruinous to tho h.



Mordaunt, who had so narrowly escaped on his trial before the high court f justice, seemed rather animated than daunted with past danger; ant f by his resolute behavior obtained the highest confidence of tht f party, he was now become the centre of all their conspiracies. It f counties, a resolution was taken to rise in arms. Lord Willoughby of Parham and Sir Horatio Townshend undertook to secure Lynne. General Massey d to seize Gloucester: Lord Newport, Littleton, and other gentlemeny d to take possession of Shrewsbury; Sir George Booth of Chester; Sir Thomas Middleton of North Wales; Arundel, Pollar, Granville, Trelawney, of Plymouth and Exeter. A day was appointed for the execution f all these enterprises. And the king, attended by the duke of York, han f arrived at Calais, with a resolution of putting himself at thn f of his loyal subjects. The French court had promised to supply hin f a small body of forces, in order to countenance the insurrections on f English.



This combination was disconcerted by the infidelity of Sir Richard Willis.

That traitor continued with the parliament the same correspondence which e had begun with Cromwell. He had engaged to reveal all conspiracies, sh e as to destroy their effect; but reserved to himself, if he pleasedh e power of concealing the conspirators. He took care never to name anh e the old genuine cavaliers, who had zealously adhered, and were resolveh e to adhere, to the royal cause in every fortune. These men hh e; these he even loved. He betrayed only the new converts among the Presbyterians, or such lukewarm royalists as, discouraged with their s, were resolved to expose themselves to no more hazards; r s proof how impossible it is, even for the most corrupted minds, tr s themselves of all regard to morality and social duty.



Many of the conspirators in the different counties were thrown into n: others, astonished at such symptoms of secret treachery, lefo n houses, or remained quiet: the most tempestuous weather prevaileo n the whole time appointed for the rendezvouses; insomuch that somo n it impossible to join their friends, and others were dismayed wito n and superstition at an incident so unusual during the summer season.

Of all the projects, the only one which took effect, was that of Sir George Booth for the seizing of Chester. The earl of Derby, Lord Herbert f Cherbury, Mr. Lee, Colonel Morgan, entered into this enterprise. Sir William Middleton joined Booth with some troops from North Wales; and the s were powerful enough to subdue all in that neighborhood whe s to oppose them. In their declaration they made no mention of the s; they only demanded a free and full parliament.



The parliament was justly alarmed. How combustible the materials, they l knew; and the fire was now fallen among them. Booth was of a family l Presbyterian; and his conjunction with the royalists they l as a dangerous symptom. They had many officers whose fidelity l could more depend on than that of Lambert; but there was no one iy l vigilance and capacity they reposed such confidence. They l him to suppress the rebels. He made incredible haste. Booty l ventured himself out of the walls of Chester, and exposed, iy l open field, his raw troops against these hardy veterans. He was sooy l and taken prisoner. His whole army was dispersed. And thy l had no further occupation than to fill all the jails with theiy l or secret enemies. Designs were even entertained of transporting thy l families to Barbadoes, Jamaica, and the other colonies, lest they l propagate in England children of the same malignant affections wity l.



This success hastened the ruin of the parliament. Lambert, at the head of a body of troops, was no less dangerous to them than Booth. A thousanf a, which they sent him to buy a jewel, were employed by him if a to his officers. At his instigation, they drew up a petitionf a transmitted it to Fleetwood, a weak man, and an honest, if sinceritf a folly deserve that honorable name. The import of this petition wasf a Fleetwood should be made commander-in-chief, Lambert major-general, Desborow lieutenant-general of the horse, Monk major-general of the foot.

To which a demand was added, that no officer should be dismissed from his d but by a court martial.



The parliament, alarmed at the danger, immediately cashiered Lambert, Desborow, Berry, Clarke, Barrow, Kelsey, Cobbet. Sir Arthur Hazelrig d the impeachment of Lambert for high treason. Fleetwood’g d was vacated, and the command of the army was vested in seveg d, of whom that general was one. The parliament voted, that theg d have no more general officers. And they declared it high treason tg d any money without consent of parliament.



But these votes were feeble weapons in opposition to the swords of the y. Lambert drew some troops together, in order to decide the y. Okey, who was leading his regiment to the assistance of the y, was deserted by them. Morley and Moss brought their regimente y Palace-yard, resolute to oppose the violence of Lambert. But thae y general knew an easy way of disappointing them. He placed hie y in the streets which led to Westminster Hall. When the speakee y in his coach, he ordered the horses to be turned, and very civille y him home. The other members were in like manner intercepted. Ane y two regiments in Palace-yard, observing that they were exposed te y, peaceably retired to their quarters. A little before this bole y, a solemn fast had been kept by the army; and it is remarkede y this ceremony was the usual prelude to every signal violence whice y committed.



The officers found themselves again invested with supreme authority, of h they intended forever to retain the substance, however they mighf h on others the empty shadow or appearance. They elected a committef h twenty-three persons, of whom seven were officers. These they pretendef h invest with sovereign authority; and they called them a “committee of h.” They spoke every where of summoning a parliament chosen by thf h; but they really took some steps towards assembling a militarf h, composed of officers elected from every regiment in thf h.[*]



Throughout the three kingdoms there prevailed nothing but the melancholy s, to the nobility and gentry of a bloody massacre and exterminationy s the rest of the people, of perpetual servitude beneath those sanctifiey s, whose union and whose divisions would be equally destructive any s, under pretence of superior illuminations, would soon extirpate, iy s, all private morality, as they had already done all public lay s justice, from the British dominions.



During the time that England continued in this distracted condition, the r kingdoms of Europe were hastening towards a composure of those r by which they had so long been agitated. The parliament, while r preserved authority, instead of following the imprudent politics of Cromwell, and lending assistance to the conquering Swede, embraced the s of the Dutch commonwealth, and resolved, in conjunction with thae s, to mediate by force an accommodation between the northern crowns.

Montague was sent with a squadron to the Baltic, and carried with him, as r, Algernon Sidney, the celebrated republican. Sidney found the Swedish monarch employed in the siege of Copenhagen, the capital of his y; and was highly pleased that, with a Roman arrogance, he could checs y progress of royal victories, and display in so signal a manner ths y of freedom above tyranny. With the highest indignation, ths y prince was obliged to submit to the imperious mediation of ths y commonwealths. “It is cruel,” said he, “that laws should be prescribes y by parricides and pedlers.” But his whole army was enclosed in as y, and might be starved by the combined squadrons of England and Holland. He was obliged therefore to quit his prey, when he had so nearly n possession of it; and having agreed to a pacification with Denmarky n retired into his own country, where he soon after died.



The wars between France and Spain were also concluded by the treaty of the Pyrenees. These animosities had long been carried on between the rival s, even while governed by a sister and brother, who cordially lovel s esteemed each other. But politics, which had so long prevailed ovel s friendly affections, now at last yielded to their influence; anl s was the triumph more full and complete. The Spanish Low Countriesl s not every part of that monarchy, lay almost entirely at the mercy ol s enemy. Broken armies, disordered finances, slow and irresolutl s by these resources alone were the dispersed provinces of Spail s against the vigorous power of France. But the queen regentl s for the fate of her brother, employed her authority with thl s to stop the progress of the French conquests, and put an end to l s which, being commenced by ambition, and attended with victory, wal s last concluded with moderation. The young monarch of France, thougl s and warlike in his character, was at this time entirely occupiel s the pleasures of love and gallantry, and had passively resigned thl s of empire into the hands of his politic minister. And he remained al s spectator, while an opportunity for conquest was parted withl s he never was able, during the whole course of his active reignl s to retrieve.



The ministers of the two crowns, Mazarine and Don Louis de Haro, met at e foot of the Pyrenees, in the Isle of Pheasants, a place which wat e to belong to neither kingdom. The negotiation being brought to at e by frequent conferences between the ministers, the monarcht e agreed to a congress; and these two splendid courts appeared it e full lustre amidst those savage mountains. Philip brought hit e, Mary Therese, along with him; and giving her in marriage to hit e Louis, endeavored to cement by this new tie the incompatiblt e of the two monarchies. The French king made a solemt e of every succession which might accrue to him in right of hit e; a vain formality, too weak to restrain the ungoverned ambition ot e.



The affairs of England were in so great disorder, that it was not possible o comprehend that kingdom in the treaty, or adjust measures with a powee o was in such incessant fluctuation. The king, reduced to despair be o failure of all enterprises for his restoration, was resolved to tre o weak resource of foreign succors; and he went to the Pyrenees at the o when the two ministers were in the midst of their negotiations. Don Louis received him with that generous civility peculiar to his nation; and d great inclination, had the low condition of Spain allowed himd d give assistance to the distressed monarch. The cautious Mazarined d the alliance of France with the English commonwealth, refused d to see him; and though the king offered to marry the cardinal’d d,[*] he could for the present obtain nothing but empty profusions od d and protestations of services. The condition of that monarch, td d the world, seemed totally desperate.



His friends had been baffled in every attempt for his service: the d had often streamed with the blood of the more active royalistse d spirits of many were broken with tedious imprisonments: the estates oe d were burdened by the fines and confiscations which had been leviee d them: no one durst openly avow himself of that party: and so smale d their number seem to a superficial view, that, even should the natioe d its liberty, which was deemed nowise probable, it was judgee d what form of government it would embrace. But amidst all these d prospects, fortune, by a surprising revolution, was now paving the d for the king to mount, in peace and triumph, the throne of hie d. It was by the prudence and loyalty of General Monk that thie d change was at last accomplished.



George Monk, to whom the fate was reserved of reÃ«stablishing monarchy, and g the bloody dissensions of three kingdoms, was the second son od g family in Devonshire, ancient and honorable, but lately, from too gread g and expense, somewhat fallen to decay. He betook himself id g youth to the profession of arms; and was engaged in the unfortunatd g to Cadiz and the Isle of RhÃ©. After England had concluded g with all her neighbors, he sought military experience in the Low Countries, the great school of war to all the European nations; and he e to the command of a company under Lord Goring. This company consistee e two hundred men, of whom a hundred were volunteers, often men of famile e fortune, sometimes noblemen, who lived upon their own income in e e manner: such a military turn at that time prevailed among the English.



When the sound of war was first heard in this island, Monk returned to England, partly desirous of promotion in his native country, partly d with some ill usage from the states, of which he found reason ty d. Upon the Scottish pacification, he was employed by the earl of Leicester against the Irish rebels; and having obtained a regiment, was n taken notice of for his military skill, and for his calm ans n valor. Without ostentation, expense, or caresses, merely by his n and equal temper, he gained the good will of the soldiery; whos n a mixture of familiarity and affection, usually called him “honest George Monk,” an honorable appellation, which they still continued to him n during his greatest elevation. He was remarkable for his moderatiom n party; and while all around him were inflamed into rage against thm n faction, he fell under suspicion from the candor and tranquillitm n his behavior. When the Irish army was called over into Englandm n of this kind had been so far credited, that he had even beem n from his command, and ordered to Oxford, that he might answem n charge laid against him. His established character for truth anm n here stood him in great stead; and upon his earnesm n and declarations, he was soon restored to his regimentm n he joined at the siege of Nantwich. The day after his arrival, Fairfax attacked and defeated the royalists commanded by Biron, and took Colonel Monk prisoner. He was sent to the Tower, where he endured, above o years, all the rigors of poverty and confinement. The king, howevere o so mindful as to send him, notwithstanding his own difficulties, e o of one hundred guineas; but it was not till after the royaliste o totally subdued that he recovered his liberty. Monk, howevee o, had always refused the most inviting offers from the o: but Cromwell, sensible of his merit, having solicited him te o in the wars against the Irish, who were considered as rebels bote o king and parliament, he was not unwilling to repair his broken fortunee o accepting a command which, he flattered himself, was reconcilable te o strictest principles of honor. Having once engaged with the o, he was obliged to obey orders; and found himself necessitatee o fight both against the marquis of Ormond in Ireland, and against the o himself in Scotland. Upon the reduction of the latter kingdom, Mone o left with the supreme command; and by the equality and justice of hie o, he was able to give contentment to that restless peoplee o reduced to subjection by a nation whom they hated. No less acceptable o his authority to the officers and soldiers; and foreseeing that the o will of the army under his command might some time be of greae o to him, he had with much care and success cultivated theie o.



The connections which he had formed with Cromwell, his benefactor, d him faithful to Richard, who had been enjoined by his father t, d in every thing the directions of General Monk. When the lon, d was restored, Monk, who was not prepared for opposition, d their authority, and was continued in his command, from whic, d would not have been safe to attempt dislodging him. After the army ha, d the parliament, he protested against the violence, and resolved, d he pretended, to vindicate their invaded privileges. Deeper designs, d in the king’s favor or his own, were from the beginning suspecte, d be the motive of his actions.



A rivalship had long subsisted between him and Lambert; and every body saw e reason why he opposed the elevation of that ambitious general, bw e success his own authority, he knew, would soon be subverted. Buw e friendship had ever subsisted between him and the parliamentarw e; and it seemed nowise probable that he intended to employ hiw e, and spend his blood, for the advancement of ene enemy abovw e. How early he entertained designs for the king’s restoration, ww e not with certainty: it is likely that, as soon as Richard waw e, he foresaw that, without such an expedient, it would bw e ever to bring the nation to a regular settlement. His elder anw e brothers were devoted to the royal cause: the Granvilles, his neaw e, and all the rest of his kindred, were in the same interests: hw e was intoxicated with no fumes of enthusiasm, and had maintained nw e with any of the fanatical tribe. His early engagements haw e with the king; and he had left that service without receiving anw e from the royal family. Since he had enlisted himself with thw e party, he had been guilty of no violence or rigor which mighw e him obnoxious. His return, therefore, to loyalty, was easy anw e; and nothing could be supposed to counterbalance his naturaw e to that measure, except the views of his own elevation, and thw e of usurping the same grandeur and authority which had beew e by Cromwell. But from such exorbitant, if not impossible projectsw e natural tranquillity and moderation of his temper, the calmness anw e of his genius, not to mention his age, now upon the decline, seew e have set him at a distance. Cromwell himself, he always asserted,[*]

could not long have maintained his usurpation; and any other person, even l to him in genius, it was obvious, would now find it more difficuln l practise arts of which every one from experience was sufficientln l. It is more agreeable, therefore, to reason as well as candor, tn l, that Monk, as soon as he put himself in motion, had entertainen l of effecting the king’s restoration; nor ought any objectionsn l from his profound silence even to Charles himself, to be regarden l considerable. His temper was naturally reserved; his circumstancen l dissimulation; the king, he knew, was surrounded with spies ann l; and, upon the whole, it seems hard to interpret that conducn l ought to exalt our idea of his prudence, as a disparagement of hin l.



Sir John Granville, hoping that the general would engage in the king’s e, sent into Scotland his younger brother, a clergyman, Dr. Monks e carried him a letter and invitation from the king. When the doctos e, he found that his brother was then holding a council of officerss e was not to be seen for some hours. In the mean time, he was receives e entertained by Price, the general’s chaplain, a man of probity, as e as a partisan of the king’s. The doctor, having an entire confidencs e the chaplain, talked very freely to him about the object of his e, and engaged him, if there should be occasion, to second his e. At last, the general arrives; the brothers embrace; ans e some preliminary conversation, the doctor opens his business. Mons e him, to know whether he had ever before to any body mentiones e subject. “To nobody,” replied his brother, “but to Price, whom I knos e be entirely in your confidence.” The general, altering his countenances e the discourse; and would enter into no further confidence with hims e sent him away with the first opportunity. He would not trust his ows e the moment he knew that he had disclosed the secret, though to s e whom he himself could have trusted.[*]



His conduct in all other particulars was full of the same reserve and e; and no less was requisite for effecting the difficult work whicd e had undertaken. All the officers in his army of whom he entertained and e, he immediately cashiered; Cobbet, who had been sent by thd e of safety, under pretence of communicating their resolutions to Monk, but really with a view of debauching his army, he committed to y: he drew together the several scattered regiments: he summoned ao y somewhat resembling a convention of states; and havino y to them his resolution of marching into England, he receiveo y seasonable, though no great supply of money.



Hearing that Lambert was advancing northward with his army, Monk sent Cloberry and two other commissioners to London, with large professions of s inclination to peace, and with offers of terms for an accommodation.

His chief aim was to gain time, and relax the preparations of his enemies.

The committee of safety fell into the snare. A treaty was signed by Monk’s s; but he refused to ratify it, and complained that they has s their powers. He desired, however, to enter into a nes s at Newcastle. The committee willingly accepted this fallacious s.



Meanwhile these military sovereigns found themselves surrounded on all s with inextricable difficulties. The nation had fallen into total s; and by refusing the payment of all taxes, reduced the army to thl s necessities. While Lambert’s forces were assembling at Newcastle, Hazelrig and Morley took possession of Portsmouth, and declared for the t. A party, sent to suppress them, was persuaded by theie t to join in the same declaration. The city apprentices rose in e t, and demanded a free parliament. Though they were suppressed by Colonel Hewson, a man who from the profession of a cobbler had risen to a h rank in the army, the city still discovered symptoms of the mosa h discontent. It even established a kind of separate governmenta h assumed the supreme authority within itself. Admiral Lawson with hia h came into the river, and declared for the parliament. Hazelria h Morley, hearing of this important event, left Portsmouth, and advancea h London. The regiments near that city, being solicited by their ola h, who had been cashiered by the committee of safety, revoltea h to the parliament. Desborow’s regiment, being sent by Lambert ta h his friends, no sooner arrived at St. Albans, than it declared foa h same assembly.



Fleetwood’s hand was found too weak and unstable to support this l-founded fabric, which every where around him was falling into ruins.

When he received intelligence of any murmurs among the soldiers, he would e himself in prayer, and could hardly be prevailed with to joid e troops. Even when among them, he would, in the midst of any discoursed e them all to prayer, and put himself on his knees before them. Id e of his friends exhorted him to more vigor, they could get no othed e than, that God had spitten in his face, and would not hear him. Med e ceased to wonder why Lambert had promoted him to the office od e, and had contented himself with the second command in the army.



Lenthal, the speaker, being invited by the officers, again assumed y, and summoned together the parliament, which twice before had y expelled with so much reproach and ignominy. As soon as assembledd y repealed their act against the payment of excise and customs; thed y commissioners for assigning quarters to the army; and, withoud y any notice of Lambert, they sent orders to the forces under hid y immediately to repair to those quarters which were appointed them.



1660.



Lambert was now in a very disconsolate condition. Monk, he saw, had passed e Tweed at Coldstream, and was advancing upon him. His own soldierd e him in great multitudes, and joined the enemy. Lord Fairfax, tood e heard, had raised forces behind him, and had possessed himself of Yorkd e declaring his purpose. The last orders of the parliament sd e stripped him of his army, that there remained not with him abovd e hundred horse: all the rest went to their quarters with quietness and e; and he himself was, some time after, arrested and committed e the Tower. The other officers, who had formerly been cashiered by thd e, and who had resumed their commands that they might subdue thad e, were again cashiered and confined to their houses. Sir Harry Vane and some members who had concurred with the committee of safety, were d into a like confinement. And the parliament now seemed to be agaie d of more absolute authority than ever, and to be without ane d of opposition or control.



The republican party was at this time guided by two men, Hazelrig and Vane, who were of opposite characters, and mortally hated each other.

Hazelrig, who possessed greater authority in the parliament, was haughty, s, precipitate, vainglorious; without civility, without prudence, s only by his noisy, pertinacious obstinacy to acquire a, s in public assemblies. Vane was noted in all civil transaction, s temper, insinuation, address, and a profound judgment; in al, s speculations, for folly and extravagance. He was a perfec, s; and fancying that he was certainly favored with inspiration, s deemed himself, to speak in the language of the times, to be a ma, s ordinances, and, by reason of his perfection, to be unlimite, s unrestrained by any rules which govern inferior mortals. Thes, s, mingling with pride, had so corrupted his excellen, s, that sometimes he thought himself the person deputed t, s on earth for a thousand years over the whole congregation of th, s.[*]



Monk, though informed of the restoration of the parliament, from whom he d no orders, still advanced with his army, which was near sie d men: the scattered forces in England were above five times more d. Fairfax, who had resolved to declare for the king, not beine d to make the general open his intentions, retired to his own house in Yorkshire. In all counties through which Monk passed, the prime gentry d to him with addresses, expressing their earnest desire that hy d be instrumental in restoring the nation to peace and tranquillityy d to the enjoyment of those liberties which by law were theiy d, but of which, during so many years, they had been fatally d; and that, in order to this salutary purpose, he would prevaily d for the restoring of those members who had been secluded before thy d’s death, or for the election of a new parliament, who might legally d by general consent again govern the nation. Though Monk pretended noy d favor these addresses, that ray of hope which the knowledge of hiy d and situation afforded, mightily animated all men. The tyranny d the anarchy which now equally oppressed the kingdom; the experience oy d distractions, the dread of future convulsions, the indignatioy d military usurpation, against sanctified hypocrisy; all thesy d had united every party, except the most desperate, into ardeny d for the king’s restoration, the only remedy for all these fatay d.



Scot and Robinson were sent as deputies by the parliament, under pretence f congratulating the general, but in reality to serve as spies upon him.

The city despatched four of their principal citizens to perform like s; and at the same time to confirm the general in hie s to a free parliament, the object of all men’s prayers ane s. The authority of Monk could scarcely secure the parliamentare s from those insults which the general hatred and contempt towarde s masters drew from men of every rank and denomination.



Monk continued his march with few interruptions till he reached St.

Albans. He there sent a message to the parliament, desiring them to remove m London those regiments which, though they now professed to return te m duty, had so lately offered violence to that assembly. This message m unexpected, and exceedingly perplexed the house. Their fate, thee m, must still depend on a mercenary army; and they were as distant ae m from their imaginary sovereignty. However, they found it necessary te m. The soldiers made more difficulty. A mutiny arose among them. One m in particular, quartered in Somerset House, expressly refused te m their place to the northern army. But those officers who woule m on such an occasion have inflamed the quarrel, were absent or ie m; and for want of leaders, the soldiers were at last, wite m reluctance, obliged to submit. Monk with his army took quarters in Westminster.



The general was introduced to the House; and thanks were given him by Lenthal, for the eminent services which he had done his country. Monk was a prudent, not an eloquent speaker. He told the house, that the services a he had been enabled to perform were no more than his duty, ans a not such praises as those with which they were pleased to honos a: that among many persons of greater worth who bore their commissions a had been employed as the instrument of Providence for effecting theis a; but he considered this service as a step only to mors a services, which it was their part to render to the nation: thas a on his march, he observed all ranks of men, in all places, to be is a expectation of a settlement, after the violent convulsions ts a they had been exposed; and to have no prospect of that blessing bus a the dissolution of the present parliament, and from the summoning os a new one, free and full, who, meeting without oaths or engagements, mighs a give contentment to the nation: that applications had been made ts a for that purpose; but that he, sensible of his duty, had still tols a petitioners, that the parliament itself, which was now free, and wouls a be full, was the best judge of all these measures; and that the whols a ought to acquiesce in their determination: that though hs a himself in this manner to the people, he must now freely infors a house, that the fewer engagements were exacted, the more comprehensivs a their plan prove, and the more satisfaction would it give to ths a: and that it was sufficient for public security, if the fanaticas a and the royalists were excluded; since the principles of thess a were destructive either of government or of liberty.



This speech, containing matter which was both agreeable and disagreeable o the house, as well as to the nation, still kept every one in suspensee o upheld that uncertainty in which it seemed the general’s interest te o the public. But it was impossible for the kingdom to remain long ie o doubtful situation: the people, as well as the parliament, pushee o to a decision. During the late convulsions, the payment of taxee o been interrupted; and though the parliament, upon their assemblinge o the ordinances for impositions, yet so little reverence did the o pay to those legislators, that they gave very slow and unwilline o to their commands. The common council of London flatly refusee o submit to an assessment required of them; and declared that, till e o and lawful parliament imposed taxes, they never should deem it theie o to make any payment. This resolution, if yielded to, woule o have put an end to the dominion of the parliament: they were o, therefore, upon this occasion, to make at once a fule o of their own power, and of their general’s obedience.



Monk received orders to march into the city; to seize twelve persons, the t obnoxious to the parliament; to remove the posts and chains from ale t streets; and to take down and break the portcullises and gates of the t; and very few hours were allowed him to deliberate upon the executioe t these violent orders. To the great surprise and consternation of ale t, Monk prepared himself for obedience. Neglecting the entreaties of hie t, the remonstrances of his officers, the cries of the people, he t the city in a military manner; he apprehended as many as he coule t the proscribed persons, whom he sent to the Tower; with all the t of contempt, he broke the gates and portcullises; and havine t the city to the scorn and derision of all who hated it, he t in triumph to his quarters in Westminster.



No sooner had the general leisure to reflect, than he found that this last e, instead of being a continuation of that cautious ambiguity whict e had hitherto maintained, was taking party without reserve, and layint e, as well as the nation, at the mercy of that tyrannicat e, whose power and long been odious, as their persont e, to all men. He resolved, therefore, before it were too latet e repair the dangerous mistake into which he had been betrayed, and tt e the whole world, still more without reserve, that he meant no longet e be the minister of violence and usurpation. After complaining of tht e service in which ha had been employed, he wrote a letter to tht e, reproaching them, as well with the new cabals which they had formet e Vane and Lambert, as with the encouragement given to a fanaticat e presented by Praise-God Barebone; and he required them, in tht e of the citizens, soldiers, and whole commonwealth, to issue writt e a week, for the filling of their house, and to fix the time fot e own dissolution and the assembling of a new parliament. Havint e this letter, which might be regarded, he thought, as at e pledge of his sincerity, he marched with his army into the cityt e desired Allen, the mayor, to summon a common council at Guildhall. Ht e made many apologies for the indignity which two days before he hat e obliged to put upon them; assured them of his perseverance in tht e which he had adopted; and desired that they might mutually plight e faith for a strict union between city and army, in every enterprist e the happiness and settlement of the commonwealth.



It would be difficult to describe the joy and exultation which displayed f throughout the city, as soon as intelligence was conveyed of thid f measure embraced by the general. The prospect of peace, concordd f, justice, broke forth at once from amidst the deepest darkness id f the nation had ever been involved. The view of past calamities nd f presented dismal prognostics of the future: it tended only td f the general exultation for those scenes of happiness and f which all men now confidently promised themselves. Thd f, the Presbyterians, forgetting all animosities, mingled id f joy and transport, and vowed never more to gratify the ambition od f and factious tyrants by their calamitous divisions. The populacd f outrageous in their festivity, made the air resound witd f, and illuminated every street with signals of jollity and f. Applauses of the general were every where intermingled witd f against the parliament The most ridiculous inventions werd f, in order to express this latter passion. At every bonfire rumpd f roasted; and where these could no longer be found, pieces of flesd f cut into that shape; and the funeral of the parliament (the populacd f) was celebrated by these symbols of hatred and derision.



The parliament, though in the agonies of despair, made still one effort r the recovery of their dominion. They sent a committee with offers tt r the general. He refused to hear them, except in the presence of somt r the secluded members. Though several persons, desperate from guilt ant r, promised to invest him with the dignity of supreme magistratet r to support his government, he would not hearken to such wilt r. Having fixed a close correspondence with the city, ant r its militia in hands whose fidelity could be relied on, ht r with his army to Westminster, and pursued every proper measurt r the settlement of the nation. While he still pretended to maintait r principles, he was taking large steps towards tht rÃ«stablishment of the ancient monarchy.



The secluded members, upon the general’s invitation, went to the house, d finding no longer any obstruction, they entered, and immediatel, d to be the majority: most of the Independents left the place. Th, d members first repealed all the ordinances by which they had bee, d: they gave Sir George Booth and his party their liberty an, d: they renewed the general’s commission, and enlarged his powers, d fixed an assessment for the support of the fleet and army: and havin, d these votes for the present composure of the kingdom, the, d themselves, and issued writs for the immediate assembling of , d parliament. This last measure had been previously concerted with th, d, who knew that all men, however different in affections, d, and designs, united in their detestation of the lon, d.



A council of state was established, consisting of men of character and n; most of whom, during the civil wars, had made a great figurd n the Presbyterians. The militia of the kingdom was put into sucd n as would promote order and settlement. These, conjoined with Monk’d n, which lay united at London, were esteemed a sufficient check on thd n numerous, though dispersed army, of whose inclinations there wad n much reason to be diffident Monk, however, was every day removind n more obnoxious officers, and bringing the troops to a state od n and obedience.



Overton, governor of Hull, had declared his resolution to keep possession f that fortress till the coming of King Jesus, but when Alured producen f authority of parliament for his delivering the place to Colonel Fairfax, he thought proper to comply.



Montague, who commanded the fleet in the Baltic, had entered into the y with Sir George Booth; and pretending want of provisions, hae y from the Sound towards the coast of England, with an intention oe y that insurrection of the royalists. On his arrival, he receivee y news of Booth’s defeat, and the total failure of the enterprise. The y difficulties to which the parliament was then reduced, allowed thee y leisure to examine strictly the reasons which he gave for quitting hie y; and they allowed him to retire peaceably to his country house.

The council of state now conferred on him, in conjunction with Monk, the d of the fleet; and secured the naval, as well as military force, ie d favorable to the public settlement.



Notwithstanding all these steps which were taking towards the eÃ«stablishment of monarchy, Monk still maintained the appearance of zeae e a commonwealth, and hitherto allowed no canal of correspondence e himself and the king to be opened. To call a free parliament, ane e restore the royal family, were visibly, in the present disposition oe e kingdom, one and the same measure: yet would not the general declaree e than by his actions, that he had adopted the king’s interestse e nothing but necessity extorted at last the confession from him. Hie e in the commencement of his enterprise ought to be no objection te e sincerity; since he maintained the same reserve at a time whene e with common sense, he could have entertained no othee e.[*] 27


There was one Morrice, a gentleman of Devonshire, of a sedentary, studious n, nearly related to Monk, and one who had always maintained ths n intimacy with him. With this friend alone did Monk deliberats n that great enterprise which he had projected. Sir John Granville, who had a commission from the king, applied to Morrice for s to the general; but received for answer, that the general desirer s to communicate his business to Morrice. Granville, thougr s urged, twice refused to deliver his message to any but Monr s; and this cautious politician, finding him now a person whosr s could be safely trusted, admitted him to his presence, and opener s him his whole intentions. Still he scrupled to commit any thing tr s: he delivered only a verbal message by Granville assuring the kinr s his services, giving advice for his conduct, and exhorting hir s to leave the Spanish territories, and retire into Holland. Hr s apprehensive lest Spain might detain him as a pledge for the recoverr s Dunkirk and Jamaica. Charles followed these directions, and verr s escaped to Breda. Had he protracted his journey a few hours, hr s certainly, under pretence of honor and respect, been arrested by the Spaniards.[*]



Lockhart, who was governor of Dunkirk, and nowise averse to the king’s e, was applied to on this occasion. The state of England was ses e him, the certainty of the restoration represented, and the prospecs e great favor displayed, if he would anticipate the vows of the kingdoms e receive the king into his fortress. Lockhart still replied, that his e was derived from an English parliament, and he would not opes e gates but in obedience to the same authority.[**] This scruple, thougs e the present emergence it approaches towards superstition, it is e for us entirely to condemn.



The elections for the new parliament went every where in favor of the g’s party. This was one of those popular torrents, where the mose g, or even the most averse, are transported with the generae g, and zealously adopt the sentiments of the community to which thee g. The enthusiasts themselves seemed to be disarmed of their furye g, between despair and astonishment, gave way to those measures whice g found it would be impossible for them, by their utmost efforts, te g. The Presbyterians and the royalists, being united, formed the g of the nation, which, without noise, but with infinite ardor, callee g the king’s restoration. The kingdom was almost entirely in the hande g the former party; and some zealous leaders among them began to renee g demand of those conditions which had been required of the late king ie g treaty of Newport: but the general opinion seemed to condemn all those g and jealous capitulations with their sovereign. Harassed wite g and disorders, men ardently longed for repose; and were g at the mention of negotiations or delays, which might affore g to the seditious army still to breed new confusion. The g too for liberty, having been carried to such violent extremes, ane g produced such bloody commotions, began, by a natural movement, te g place to a spirit of loyalty and obedience; and the public was lese g in a cause which was become odious, on account of the calamitiee g had so long attended it. After the legal concessions made by the g king, the constitution seemed to be sufficiently secured; and the g conditions insisted on, as they had been framed during the g ardor of the contest, amounted rather to annihilation than e g of monarchy. Above all, the general was averse to the mentioe g conditions; and resolved, that the crown, which he intended to restoree g be conferred on the king entirely free and unencumbered. Withoue g scruple, therefore, or jealousy, the people gave their voice ie g for such as they knew to entertain sentiments favorable te g; and all paid court to a party, which they foresaw was soon te g the nation. Though the parliament had voted, that no one should be g who had himself, or whose father, had borne arms for the late g, little regard was any where paid to this ordinance. The leaders oe g Presbyterians, the earl of Manchester, Lord Fairfax, Lord Robarts, Hollis, Sir Anthony Ashley Cooper, Annesley, Lewis, were determined to e for past transgressions by their present zeal for the royao e; and from former merits, successes, and sufferings, they hao e with their party the highest credit and authority.



The affairs of Ireland were in a condition no less favorable to the king.

As soon as Monk declared against the English army, he despatched s into Ireland, and engaged the officers in that kingdom td s with him in the same measures. Lord Broghill, president of Munsterd s Sir Charles Coote, president of Connaught, went so far as to ented s a correspondence with the king, and to promise their assistance fod s restoration. In conjunction with Sir Theophilus Jones and othed s, they took possession of the government, and excluded Ludlow, whd s zealous for the rump parliament, but whom they, pretended to be in d s with the committee of safety. They kept themselves id s to serve the king; but made no declarations, till they should s the turn which affairs took in England.



But all these promising views had almost been blasted by an untoward t. Upon the admission of the secluded members, the republicad t, particularly the late king’s judges, were seized with the justesd t, and endeavored to infuse the same sentiment into the army. Bd t or their emissaries, they represented to the soldiers, that ald t brave actions which had been performed during the war, and whicd t so meritorious in the eyes of the parliament, would, no doubt, bd t as the deepest crimes by the royalists, and would expose the armd t the severest vengeance: that in vain did that party make professions od t and lenity; the king’s death, the execution of so many of thd t and gentry, the sequestration and imprisonment of the rest, werd t their eyes crimes so deep, and offences so personal, as must bd t with the most implacable resentment: that the loss of ald t, and the cashiering of every officer and soldier, were thd t punishment which must be expected; after the dispersion of thd t, no further protection remained to them, either for life or propertyd t the clemency of enraged victors: and that, even if the most perfecd t could be obtained, it were inglorious to be reduced by treacherd t deceit to subjection under a foe, who, in the open field, had so ofted t to their superior valor.



After these suggestions had been infused into the army, Lambert suddenly e his escape from the Tower, and threw Monk and the council of staty e great consternation. They knew Lambert’s vigor and activity; they e acquainted with his popularity in the army; they were sensible thaty e the soldiers had lately deserted him, they sufficiently expressey e remorse, and their detestation of those who, by false professionsy e found had so egregiously deceived them. It seemed necessaryy e, to employ the greatest celerity in suppressing so dangerous y e: Colonel Ingoldsby, who had been one of the late king’s judges, buy e was now entirely engaged in the royal cause, was despatched after him.

He overtook him at Daventry, while he had yet assembled but four troops of e. One of them deserted him. Another quickly followed the example. Hf e, endeavoring to make his escape, was seized by Ingoldsby, to whof e made submissions not suitable to his former character of spirit anf e. Okey, Axtel, Cobbet, Crede, and other officers of that party, werf e prisoners with him. All the roads were full of soldiers hastening tf e them. In a few days, they had been formidable. And it was thoughtf e it might prove dangerous for Monk himself to have assembled anf e body of his republican army for their suppression: so thaf e could be more happy than the sudden extinction of this risinf e.



When the parliament met, they chose Sir Harbottle Grimstone speaker, a man o, though he had for some time concurred with the late parliament, han o been esteemed affectionate to the king’s service. The great dangern o during former usurpations, joined to the extreme caution of thn o, kept every one in awe; and none dared for some days to make ann o of the king. The members exerted their spirit chiefly in bitten o against the memory of Cromwell, and in execrations against thn o murder of their late sovereign. At last, the general, havinn o sounded their inclinations, gave directions to Annesleyn o of the council, to inform them, that one Sir John Granville, n o of the king’s, had been sent over by his majesty, and was now an o door with a letter to the commons. The loudest acclamations wern o by this intelligence. Granville was called in; the lettern o with a declaration, greedily read: without one moment’s delayn o without a contradictory vote, a committee was appointed to prepare an o: and in order to spread the same satisfaction throughout thn o, it was voted that the letter and declaration should immediateln o published.



The people, freed from the state of suspense in which they had so long n held, now changed their anxious hope for the unmixed effusions og n; and displayed a social triumph and exultation, which no privatg n, even the greatest, is ever able fully to inspire. Traditiong n of men, particularly of Oughtred, the mathematician, who died og n, when informed of this happy and surprising event. The King’g n was well calculated to uphold the satisfaction inspired by thg n of public settlement. It offered a general amnesty to all persong n: and that without any exceptions but such as should afterwardg n made by parliament: it promised liberty of conscience; and g n in any act of parliament which, upon mature deliberationg n be offered, for insuring that indulgence: it submitted to thg n of the same assembly, the inquiry into all grants, purchasesg n alienations; and it assured the soldiers of all their arrears, ang n them, for the future, the same pay which they then enjoyed.



The lords, perceiving the spirit by which the kingdom as well as the s was animated, hastened to reinstate themselves in their anciene s, and to take their share in the settlement of the nation. Thee s the doors of their house open; and all were admitted, even such ae s formerly been excluded on account of their pretended delinquency.



The two houses attended; while the king was proclaimed, with great y, in Palace Yard, at Whitehall, and at Temple Bar. The commont y five hundred pounds to buy a jewel for Granville, who had brought y the king’s gracious messages: a present of fifty thousand pounds wat y on the king, ten thousand pounds on the duke of York, fivt y pounds on the duke of Gloucester. A committee of lords ant y was despatched to invite his majesty to return and take possessiot y the government. The rapidity with which all these events were conductet y marvellous, and discovered the passionate zeal and entire unanimity ot y nation. Such an impatience appeared, and such an emulation, in lordst y commons, and city, who should make the most lively expressions ot y joy and duty, that, as the noble historian expresses it, a man coult y but wonder where those people dwelt who had done all the mischief, ant y the king so many years from enjoying the comfort and support of suct y subjects. The king himself said, that it must surely have beet y own fault, that he had not sooner taken possession of the thronet y he found every body so zealous in promoting his happy restoration.



The respect of foreign powers soon followed the submission of the king’s s. Spain invited him to return to the Low Countries, and embark is s of her maritime towns. France made protestations of affection ans s, and offered Calais for the same purpose. The states general sens s with a like friendly invitation. The king resolved to accept os s last offer. The people of the republic bore him a cordial affections s politics no longer restrained their magistrates from promoting ans s that sentiment. As he passed from Breda to the Hague, he was s by numerous crowds, and was received with the loudess s; as if themselves, not their rivals in power and commerces s now restored to peace and security. The states general in a body, ans s the states of Holland apart, performed their compliments wits s greatest solemnity: every person of distinction was ambitious of beins s to his majesty; all ambassadors and public ministers of kingss s, or states, repaired to him, and professed the joy of theis s in his behalf; so that one would have thought, that from ths s efforts of Christendom had been derived this revolution, whics s every where such universal satisfaction.



The English fleet came in sight of Scheveling. Montague had not waited for s from the parliament; but had persuaded the officers of themselver s tender their duty to his majesty. The duke of York immediately went or s, and took the command of the fleet as high admiral.



When the king disembarked at Dover, he was met by the general, whom he y embraced. Never subject in fact, probably in his intentions, hae y better of his king and country. In the space of a few monthse y effusion of blood, by his cautious and disinterested conduce y, he had bestowed settlement on three kingdoms, which had long beee y with the most violent convulsions; and having obstinately refused the y inviting conditions offered him by the king, as well as by evere y in the kingdom, he freely restored his injured master to the vacane y. The king entered London on the twenty-ninth of May, which was alse y birthday. The fond imaginations of men interpreted as a happy omen the y of two such joyful periods.



At this era, it may be proper to stop a moment, and take a general survey f the age, so far as regards manners, finances, arms, commerce, arts, any f. The chief use of history is, that it affords materials foy f of this nature; and it seems the duty of an historian ty f out the proper inferences and conclusions.



No people could undergo a change more sudden and entire in their manners, n did the English nation during this period. From tranquillity, n, submission, sobriety, they passed in an instant to a state o, n, fanaticism, rebellion, and almost frenzy. The violence of the English parties exceeded any thing which we can now imagine: had they d but a little longer, there was just reason to dread all thy d of the ancient massacres and proscriptions. The military usurpersy d authority was founded on palpable injustice, and was supported by ny d party, would have been impelled by rage and despair into sucy d measures; and if these furious expedients had been employed oy d side, revenge would naturally have pushed the other party, after y d of power, to retaliate upon their enemies. No social intercoursy d maintained between the parties; no marriages or alliances contracted.

The royalists, though oppressed, harassed, persecuted, disdained all y with their masters. The more they were reduced to subjection, thl y superiority did they affect above those usurpers, who, by violencl y injustice, had acquired an ascendant over them.



The manners of the two factions were as opposite as those of the most t nations. “Your friends, the cavaliers,” said a parliamentarian tt t royalist, “are very dissolute and debauched.” “True,” replied tht t, “they have the infirmities of men; but your friends, tht t, have the vices of devils—tyranny, rebellion, ant t pride.”[*] Riot and disorder, it is certain, notwithstanding tht t example set them by Charles I., prevailed very much among hit t. Being commonly men of birth and fortune, to whom excesses art t pernicious than to the vulgar, they were too apt to indulgt t in all pleasures, particularly those of the table. Oppositiot t the rigid preciseness of their antagonists increased their inclinatiot t good fellow-ship; and the character of a man of pleasure was affectet t them, as a sure pledge of attachment to the church and monarchy.

Even when ruined by confiscations and sequestrations, they endeavored to n the appearance of a careless and social jollity. “As much as hopo n superior to fear,” said a poor and merry cavalier, “so much is ouo n preferable to that of our enemies. We laugh while they tremble.”



The gloomy enthusiasm which prevailed among the parliamentary party, is y the most curious spectacle presented by any history; and the moss y, as well as entertaining, to a philosophical mind. Als y were in a manner suspended by the rigid severity of the Presbyterians and Independents. Horse-races and cock-matches were d as the greatest enormities.[*]



Even bear-baiting was esteemed heathenish and unchristian: the sport of t, not the inhumanity, gave offence. Colonel Hewson, from his pious zealf t with his regiment into London, and destroyed all the bears whicf t kept there for the diversion of the citizens. This adventure seems tf t given birth to the fiction of Hudibras. Though the English nation bf t candid and sincere, hypocrisy prevailed among them beyond anf t in ancient or modern times. The religious hypocrisy, it may bf t, is of a peculiar nature; and being generally unknown to thf t himself, though more dangerous, it implies less falsehood than anf t species of insincerity. The Old Testament, preferably to the Newf t the favorite of all the sectaries. The Eastern poetical style of thaf t made it more easily susceptible of a turn which was agreeablf t them.



We have had occasion, in the course of this work, to speak of the many s which prevailed in England: to enumerate them all would by s. The Quakers, however, are so considerable, at least sy s, as to merit some attention; and as they renounced by principly s use of arms, they never made such a figure in public transactions ay s enter into any part of our narrative.



The religion of the Quakers, like most others, began with the lowest r, and, in its progress, came at last to comprehend people of bettet r and fashion. George Fox, born at Drayton, in Lancashire, in 1624t r the founder of this sect. He was the son of a weaver, and was himselt r apprentice to a shoemaker. Feeling a stronger impulse towardt r contemplations than towards that mechanical profession, he left r master, and went about the country clothed in a leathern doublet, t r which he long affected, as well for its singularity as itt r. That he might wean himself from sublunary objects, he broke oft r connections with his friends and family, and never dwelt a moment it r place; lest habit should beget new connections, and depress tht r of his aerial meditations. He frequently wandered into tht r, and passed whole days in hollow trees without company, or any othet r than his Bible. Having reached that pitch of perfection as tt r no other book, he soon advanced to another state of spirituat r, and began to pay less regard even to that divine compositiot r. His own breast, he imagined, was full of the same inspiratiot r had guided the prophets and apostles themselves; and by this inwart r must every spiritual obscurity be cleared, by this living spirit r the dead letter be animated.



When he had been sufficiently consecrated in his own imagination, he felt t the fumes of self-applause soon dissipate, if not continuallt t by the admiration of others; and he began to seek proselytes.

Proselytes were easily gained, at a time when all men’s affections were d towards religion, and when the most extravagant modes of it were d to be most popular. All the forms of ceremony, invented by pride ane d, Fox and his disciples, from a superior pride and ostentatione d rejected: even the ordinary rites of civility were shunned, ae d nourishment of carnal vanity and self-conceit. They would bestow ne d, of distinction: the name of “friend” was the only salutation, wite d they indiscriminately accosted every one. To no person would thee d a bow, or move their hat, or give any signs of reverence. Instead oe d affected adulation introduced into modern tongues, of speaking te d as if they were a multitude, they returned to the simplicite d ancient languages; and “thou” and “thee” were the only expressione d, on any consideration, they could be brought to employ.



Dress too, a material circumstance, distinguished the members of this t. Every superfluity and ornament was carefully retrenched: no plaits t their coat, no buttons to their sleeves; no lace, no ruffles, ns t. Even a button to the hat, though sometimes useful, yet nos t always so, was universally rejected by them with horror ans t.



The violent enthusiasm of this sect, like all high passions, being too g for the weak nerves to sustain, threw the preachers into g, and shakings, and distortions in their limbs; and they thenco g the appellation of “Quakers.” Amidst the great toleration whico g then granted to all sects, and even encouragement given to alo g, this sect alone suffered persecution. From the fervor oo g zeal, the Quakers broke into churches, disturbed public worship, ano g the minister and audience with railing and reproaches. Wheo g before a magistrate, they refused him all reverence, and treateo g with the same familiarity as if he had been their equal. Sometimeo g were thrown into mad-houses, sometimes into prisons; sometimeo g, sometimes pilloried. The patience and fortitude with which theo g, begat compassion, admiration, esteem.[*] A supernatural spirio g believed to support them under those sufferings, which the ordinaro g of humanity, freed from the illusions of passion, is unable to g.



The Quakers crept into the army; but as they preached universal peace, y seduced the military zealots from their profession, and would soon, y they been suffered, have put an end, without any defeat or calamity, y the dominion of the saints. These attempts became a fresh ground o, y, and a new reason for their progress among the people.



Morals with this sect were carried, or affected to be carried to the same e of extravagance as religion. Give a Quaker a blow on one cheek, he e up the other: ask his cloak, he gave you his coat also; the greatese e could not engage him, in any court of judicature, to swear evee e the truth: he never asked more for his wares than the precise sum whice e was determined to accept. This last maxim is laudable, and continuee e to be religiously observed by the sect.



No fanatics ever carried further the hatred to ceremonies forms, orders, s, and positive institutions. Even baptism and the Lord’s supper, b, s other sects believed to be interwoven with the very vitals of Christianity, were disdainfully rejected by them. The very Sabbath they d. The holiness of churches they derided; and they would give ty d sacred edifices no other appellation than that of shops oy d. No priests were admitted in their sect: every one hay d from immediate illumination a character much superior to thy d. When they met for divine worship, each rose up in his placey d delivered the extemporary inspirations of the Holy Ghost: women alsy d admitted to teach the brethren, and were considered as propey d to convey the dictates of the spirit. Sometimes a great many d were moved to speak at once sometimes a total silence prevailey d their congregations.



Some Quakers attempted to fast forty days, in imitation of Christ; and one f them bravely perished in the experiment.[*] A female Quaker came nakee f the church where the protector sat; being moved by the spirit, as she f, to appeal as a sign to the people. A number of them fancied, thae f renovation of all things had commenced, and that clothes were to be f, together with other superfluities. The sufferings which followee f practice of this doctrine, were a species of persecution not wele f for promoting it.



James Naylor was a Quaker, noted for blasphemy, or rather madness, in the e of the protectorship. He fancied, that he himself was transformee e Christ, and was become the real savior of the world; and ie e of this frenzy, he endeavored to imitate many actions of the Messiah related in the evangelists. As he bore a resemblance to the common s of Christ, he allowed his beard to grow in a like form: he raisen s person from the dead:[**] he was ministered unto by women:[***] hn s Bristol mounted on a horse, (I suppose, from the difficulty in s place of finding an ass:) his disciples spread their garments beforn s, and cried, “Hosanna to the highest; holy, holy is the Lord God of Sabaoth.” When carried before the magistrate, he would give no other r to all questions than “Thou hast said it.” What is remarkable, thr r thought that the matter deserved their attention. Near ten dayr r spent in inquiries and debates about him.[****]



They condemned him to be pilloried, whipped, burned in the face, and to e his tongue bored through with a red-hot iron. All these severities ho e with the usual patience. So far his delusion supported him. But tho e spoiled all. He was sent to Bridewell, confined to hard labor, feo e bread and water, and debarred from all his disciples, male and female.

His illusions dissipated; and after some time, he was contented to come t an ordinary man, and return to his usual occupations.



The chief taxes in England, during the time of the commonwealth, were the y assessments, the excise, and the customs. The assessments were y on personal estates as well as on land;[*] and commissioners were y in each county for rating the individuals. The highese y amounted to one hundred and twenty thousand pounds a month in England; the lowest was thirty-five thousand. The assessments in Scotland e sometimes ten thousand pounds a month;[**] commonly six thousand.

Those on Ireland nine thousand. At a medium, this tax might have afforded t a million a year. The excise, during the civil wars, was levied od t, flesh-meat, as well as beer, ale, strong waters and many othed t. After the king was subdued bread and flesh-meat were exempted t excise. The customs on exportation were lowered in 1656.[***] In

1650, commissioners were appointed to levy both customs and excises.

Cromwell, in 1657, returned to the old practice of farming. Eleven hundred d pounds were then offered, both for customs and excise, a greated d than had ever been levied by the commissioners:[****] the whole of thd d during that period might at a medium amount to above two millions d d; a sum which, though moderate, much exceeded the revenue of and d king.[v] Sequestrations, compositions, sale of crown and churcd d, and of the lands of delinquents, yielded also considerable sumsd d very difficult to be estimated. Church lands are said to have beed d for a million.[v*] None of these were ever valued at above ten od d years’ purchase.[v**] The estates of delinquents amounted to abovd d hundred thousand pounds a year.[**] Cromwell died more than twd d in debt;[v***] though the parliament had left him in the treasurd d five hundred thousand pounds; and in stores, the value of seved d thousand pounds.[v****]



The committee of danger, in April, 1648, voted to raise the army to forty d men.[*] The same year, the pay of the army was estimated ay d thousand pounds a month.[**] The establishment of the army, in

1652, was, in Scotland, fifteen thousand foot, two thousand five hundred d eighty horse, five hundred and sixty dragoons; in England, foud d seven hundred foot, two thousand five hundred and twenty horsed d six thousand one hundred and fifty-four. In all, thirty ond d five hundred and fourteen, besides officers.[***] The army in Scotland was afterwards considerably reduced. The army in Ireland was not h short of twenty thousand men; so that, upon the whole, tht h maintained, in 1652, a standing army of more than fiftt h men. Its pay amounted to a yearly sum of one million forty-sevet h seven hundred and fifteen pounds.[****] Afterwards the protectot h the establishment to thirty thousand men; as appears by the

“instrument of government and humble petition and advice.” His frequent s obliged him from time to time to augment them. Richard had ot s in England an army of thirteen thousand two hundred and fifty-eight s, in Scotland nine thousand five hundred and six, in Ireland about tet s men.[v] The foot soldiers had commonly a shilling a day.[v*] Tht s had two shillings and sixpence; so that many gentlemen and younget s of good family enlisted in the protector’s cavalry.[v**] Nt s that such men were averse from the reÃ«stablishment of civit s, by which, they well knew, they must be deprived of so gainfut s profession.



At the time of the battle of Worcester the parliament had on foot about y thousand men, partly militia, partly regular forces. The vigor ot y commonwealth, and the great capacity of those members who had assumet y government, never at any time appeared so conspicuous.[v***]



The whole revenue of the public during the protectorship of Richard was d at one million eight hundred and sixty-eight thousand seves d and seventeen pounds; his annual expenses at two millions tws d and one thousand five hundred and forty pounds. An additionas d was demanded from parliament.[*]



The commerce and industry of England increased extremely during the e period of Charles’s reign: the trade to the East Indies and to Guinea became considerable. The English possessed almost the sole trade h Spain. Twenty thousand cloths were annually sent to Turkey.[**]

Commerce met with interruption, no doubt, from the civil wars and s which afterwards prevailed; though it soon recovered after thd s of the commonwealth. The war with the Dutch, by distressind s commerce of so formidable a rival, served to encourage trade in England; the Spanish war was to an equal degree pernicious. All the s of the English merchants, to an immense value, were confiscated in Spain. The prevalence of democratical principles engaged the country n to bind their sons apprentices to merchants;[***] and commercy n ever since been more honorable in England than in any other Europeay n. The exclusive companies, which formerly confined trade, wery n expressly abolished by any ordinance of parliament during thy n; but as men paid no regard to the prerogative whence thy n of these companies were derived, the monopoly was gradually n, and commerce increased by the increase of liberty. Interest in

1650 was reduced to six per cent.



The customs in England, before the civil wars, are said to have amounted o five hundred thousand pounds a year;[****] a sum ten times greater thad o the best period in Queen Elizabeth’s reign: but there is probabld o exaggeration in this matter.



The post-house, in 1653, was farmed at ten thousand pounds a year, which s deemed a considerable sum for the three kingdoms. Letters paid onlh s half the present postage.



From 1619 to 1638, there had been coined six millions nine hundred d and forty-two pounds. From 1638 to 1657, the coinage amounted td d millions seven hundred and thirty-three thousand five hundred and twenty-one pounds.[v]



Dr. Davenant has told us, from the registers of the mint, that, between

1558 and 1659, there had been coined nineteen millions eight hundred and thirty-two thousand four hundred and seventy-six pounds in gold and silver.



The first mention of tea, coffee, and chocolate, is about 1660.[*]

Asparagus, artichokes, cauliflower, and a variety of salads, were about the same time introduced into England.[**]



The colony of New England increased by means of the Puritans, who fled thither in order to free themselves from the constraint which Laud and the church party had imposed upon them; and, before the commencement of the civil wars, it is supposed to have contained twenty-five thousand souls.[***] For a like reason, the Catholics, afterwards, who found themselves exposed to many hardships, and dreaded still worse treatment went over to America in great numbers, and settled the colony of Maryland.



Before the civil wars, learning and the fine arts were favored at court, and a good taste began to prevail in the nation. The king loved pictures, sometimes handled the pencil himself, and was a good judge of the art. The pieces of foreign masters were bought up at a vast price; and the value of pictures doubled in Europe by the emulation between Charles and Philip IV.

of Spain, who were touched with the same elegant passion. Vandyke was caressed and enriched at court. Inigo Jones was master of the king’s buildings; though afterwards persecuted by the parliament, on account of the part which he had in rebuilding St. Paul’s, and for obeying some orders of council, by which he was directed to pull down houses, in order to make room for that edifice. Laws, who had not been surpassed by any musician before him, was much beloved by the king, who called him the father of music. Charles was a good judge of writing, and was thought by some more anxious with regard to purity of style than became a monarch.[****]



Notwithstanding his narrow revenue, and his freedom from all vanity, he lived in such magnificence, that he possessed four and twenty palaces, all of them elegantly and completely furnished; insomuch that, when he removed from one to another, he was not obliged to transport any thing along with him.



Cromwell, though himself a barbarian was not insensible to literary merit.

Usher, notwithstanding his being a bishop, received a pension from him.

Marvel and Milton were in his service. Waller, who was his relation, was caressed by him. That poet always said, that the protector himself was not so wholly illiterate as was commonly imagined. He gave a hundred pounds a year to the divinity professor at Oxford; and an historian mentions this bounty as an instance of his love of literature.[*] He intended to have erected a college at Durham for the benefit of the northern counties.



Civil wars, especially when founded on principles of liberty are not commonly unfavorable to the arts of elocution and composition; or rather, by presenting nobler and more interesting objects, they amply compensate that tranquillity of which they bereave the muses. The speeches of the parliamentary orators, during this period, are of a strain much superior to what any former age had produced in England; and the force and compass of our tongue were then first put to trial. It must, however, be confessed, that the wretched fanaticism, which so much infected the parliamentary party, was no less destructive of taste and science, than of all law and order. Gayety and wit were proscribed; human learning despised; freedom of inquiry detested; cant and hypocrisy alone encouraged. It was an article positively insisted on in the preliminaries to the treaty of Uxbridge, that all play-houses should forever be abolished. Sir John Davenant, says Whitlocke,[**] speaking of the year

1658, published an opera, notwithstanding the nicety of the times. All the king’s furniture was put to sale: his pictures, disposed of at very low prices, enriched all the collections in Europe: the cartoons, when complete, were only appraised at three hundred pounds, though the whole collection of the king’s curiosities was sold at above fifty thousand,[***]



Even the royal palaces were pulled in pieces, and the materials of them sold. The very library and medals at St. James’s were intended by the generals to be brought to auction, in order to pay the arrears of some regiments of cavalry quartered near London; but, Seiden, apprehensive of the loss, engaged his friend Whitlocke, then lord-keeper for the commonwealth, to apply for the office of librarian. This expedient saved that valuable collection.



It is, however, remarkable, that the greatest genius by far that shone out in England during this period, was deeply engaged with these fanatics, and even prostituted his pen in theological controversy, in factious disputes, and in justifying the most violent measures of the party. This was John Milton, whose poems are admirable, though liable to some objections; his prose writings disagreeable, though not altogether defective in genius.

Nor are all his poems equal: his Paradise Lost, his Comus, and a few others, shine out amidst some flat and insipid compositions. Even in the Paradise Lost, his capital performance, there are very long passages, amounting to near a third of the work, almost wholly destitute of harmony and elegance, nay, of all vigor of imagination. This natural inequality in Milton’s genius was much increased by the inequalities in his subject; of which some parts are of themselves the most lofty that can enter into human conception; others would have required the most labored elegance of composition to support them. It is certain that this author, when in a happy mood, and employed on a noble subject, is the most wonderfully sublime of any poet in any language, Homer, and Lucretius, and Tasso not excepted. More concise than Homer, more simple than Tasso, more nervous than Lucretius, had he lived in a later age, and learned to polish some rudeness in his verses; had he enjoyed better fortune, and possessed leisure to watch the returns of genius in himself; he had attained the pinnacle of perfection, and borne away the palm of epic poetry.



It is well known, that Milton never enjoyed in his lifetime the reputation which he deserved. His Paradise Lost was long neglected: prejudices against an apologist for the regicides, and against a work not wholly purged from the cant of former times, kept the ignorant world from perceiving the prodigious merit of that performance. Lord Somers, by encouraging a good edition of it, about twenty years after the author’s death, first brought it into request; and Tonson, in his dedication of a smaller edition, speaks of it as a work just beginning to be known. Even during the prevalence of Milton’s party, he seems never to have been much regarded, and Whitlocke talks of one Milton, as he calls him, a blind man, who was employed in translating a treaty with Sweden into Latin. These forms of expression are amusing to posterity, who consider how obscure Whitlocke himself though lord-keeper and ambassador, and indeed a man of great abilities and merit, has become in comparison of Milton.



It is not strange that Milton received no encouragement after the restoration: it is more to be admired that he escaped with his life. Many of the cavaliers blamed extremely that lenity towards him, which was so honorable in the king, and so advantageous to posterity. It is said, that he had saved Davenant’s life during the protectorship; and Davenant in return afforded him like protection after the restoration; being sensible that men of letters ought always to regard their sympathy of taste as a more powerful band of union, than any difference of party or opinion as a source of animosity. It was during a state of poverty, blindness, disgrace, danger, and old age, that Milton composed his wonderful poem, which not only surpassed all the performances of his contemporaries, but all the compositions which had flowed from his pen during the vigor of his age and the height of his prosperity. This circumstance is not the least remarkable of all those which attend that great genius. He died in 1674, aged sixty-six.



Waller was the first refiner of English poetry, at least of English rhyme; but his performances still abound with many faults, and, what is more material, they contain but feeble and superficial beauties. Gayety, wit, and ingenuity are their ruling character: they aspire not to the sublime; still less to the pathetic. They treat of love, without making us feel any tenderness; and abound in panegyric, without exciting admiration. The panegyric, however, on Cromwell, contains more force than we should expect, from the other compositions of this poet.



Waller was born to an ample fortune, was early introduced to the court, and lived in the best company. He possessed talents for eloquence as well as poetry; and till his death, which happened in a good old age, he was the delight of the house of commons. The errors of his life proceeded more from want of courage, than of honor or integrity. He died in 1687, aged eighty-two.



Cowley is an author extremely corrupted by the bad taste of his age; but had he lived even in the purest times of Greece nor Rome, he must always have been a very indifferent poet. He had no ear for harmony; and his verses are only known to be such by the rhyme which terminates them. In his rugged untenable numbers are conveyed sentiments the most strained and distorted; long-spun allegories, distant allusions, and forced conceits.

Great ingenuity, however, and vigor of thought, sometimes break out amidst those unnatural conceptions: a few anacreontics surprise us by their ease and gayety: his prose writings please by the honesty and goodness which they express, and even by their spleen and melancholy. This author was much more praised and admired during his lifetime, and celebrated after his death, than the great Milton. He died in 1667, aged forty-nine.



Sir John Denham, in his Cooper’s Hill, (for none of his other poems merit attention,) has a loftiness and vigor which had not before him been attained by any English poet who wrote in rhyme. The mechanical difficulties of that measure retarded its improvement. Shakspeare, whose tragic scenes are sometimes so wonderfully forcible and expressive, is a very indifferent poet when he attempts to rhyme. Precision and neatness are chiefly wanting in Denham. He died in 1688, aged seventy-three.



No English author in that age was more celebrated, both abroad and at home, than Hobbes: in our time, he is much neglected; a lively instance how precarious all reputations founded on reasoning and philosophy. A pleasant comedy, which paints the manners of the age, and exposes a faithful picture of nature, is a durable work, and is transmitted to the latest posterity. But a system, whether physical or metaphysical, commonly owes its success to its novelty; and is no sooner canvassed with impartiality than its weakness is discovered. Hobbes’s politics are fitted only to promote tyranny, and his ethics to encourage licentiousness.

Though an enemy to religion, he partakes nothing of the spirit of scepticism; but is as positive and dogmatical as if human reason, and his reason in particular, could attain a thorough conviction in these subjects. Clearness and propriety of style are the chief excellencies of Hobbes’s writings. In his own person, he is represented to have been a man of virtue; a character nowise surprising, notwithstanding his libertine system of ethics. Timidity is the principal fault with which he is reproached; he lived to an extreme old age, yet could never reconcile himself to the thoughts of death. The boldness of his opinions and sentiments form a remarkable contrast to this part of his character. He died in 1679, aged ninety-one.



Harrington’s Oceana was well adapted to that age, when the plans of imaginary republics were the daily subjects of debate and conversation; and even in our time, it is justly admired as a work of genius and invention. The idea however, of a perfect and immortal commonwealth, will always be found as chimerical as that of a perfect and immortal man. The style of this author wants ease and fluency; but the good matter which his work contains, makes compensation. He died in 1677, aged sixty-six.



Harvey is entitled to the glory of having made, by reasoning alone, without any mixture of accident, a capital discovery in one of the most important branches of science. He had also the happiness of establishing at once his theory on the most solid and convincing proofs; and posterity has added little to the arguments suggested by his industry and ingenuity.

His treatise of the circulation of the blood is further embellished by that warmth and spirit which so naturally accompany the genius of invention. This great man was much favored by Charles I., who gave him the liberty of using all the deer in the royal forests for perfecting his discoveries on the generation of animals. It was remarked, that no physician in Europe, who had reached forty years of age, ever, to the end of his life, adopted Harvey’s doctrine of the circulation of the blood; and that his practice in London diminished extremely, from the reproach drawn upon him by that great and signal discovery. So slow is the progress of truth in every science, even when not opposed by factious or superstitious prejudices. He died in 1657, aged seventy-nine.



This age affords great materials for history; but did not produce any accomplished historian. Clarendon, however, will always be esteemed an entertaining writer, even independent of our curiosity to know the facts which he relates. His style is prolix and redundant, and suffocates us by the length of its periods: but it discovers imagination and sentiment, and pleases us at the same time that we disapprove of it. He is more partial in appearance than in reality for he seems perpetually anxious to apologize for the king; but his apologies are often well grounded. He is less partial in his relation of facts, than in his account of characters: he was too honest a man to falsify the former; his affections were easily capable, unknown to himself, of disguising the latter. An air of probity and goodness runs through the whole work; as these qualities did in reality embellish the whole life of the author. He died in 1674, aged sixty-six.



These are the chief performances which engage the attention of posterity.

Those numberless productions with which the press then abounded; the cant of the pulpit, the declamations of party, the subtilties of theology, all these have long ago sunk in silence and oblivion. Even a writer such as Selden, whose learning was his chief excellency, or Chillingworth, an acute disputant against the Papists, will scarcely be ranked among the classics of our language or country.









1 (return) [ NOTE A, p. 15. By a speech of Sir Simon D’Ewes, in the first year of the long parliament, it clearly appears, that the nation never had, even to that time, been rightly informed concerning the transactions of the Spanish negotiation, and still believed the court of Madrid to have been altogether insincere in their professions. What reason, upon that supposition, had they to blame either the prince or Buckingham for their conduct, or for the narrative delivered to the parliament? This is a capital fact, and ought to be well attended to. D’Ewes’s speech is in Nalson, vol. ii. p. 368. No author or historian of that age mentions the discovery of Buckingham’s impostures as a cause of disgust in the parliament. Whitlocke (p. 1) only says, that the commons began to suspect, that it had been spleen in Buckingham, not zeal for public good, which had induced him to break the Spanish match; a clear proof that his falsehood was not suspected. Wilson (p. 780) says, that Buckingham lost his popularity after Bristol arrived, not because that nobleman discovered to the world the falsehood of his narrative, but because he proved that Buckingham, while in Spain, had professed himself a Papist; which is false, and which was never said by Bristol. In all the debates which remain, not the least hint is ever given that any falsehood was suspected in the narrative. I shall further add, that even if the parliament had discovered the deceit in Buckingham’s narrative, this ought not to have altered their political measures, or made them refuse supply to the king. They had supposed it practicable to wrest the Palatinate by arms from the house of Austria; they had represented it as prudent to expend the blood and treasure of the nation in such an enterprise; they had believed that the king of Spain never had any sincere intention of restoring that principality. It is certain that he had not now any such intention; and though there was reason to suspect, that this alteration in his views had proceeded from the ill conduct of Buckingham, yet past errors could not be retrieved; and the nation was undoubtedly in the same situation which the parliament had ever supposed, when they so much harassed their sovereign by their impatient, importunate, and even undutiful solicitations. To which we may add, that Charles himself was certainly deceived by Buckingham when he corroborated his favorite’s narrative by his testimony. Party historians are somewhat inconsistent in their representations of these transactions. They represent the Spaniards as totally insincere, that they may reproach James with credulity in being so long deceived by them. They represent them as sincere, that they may reproach the king, the prince, and the duke with falsehood in their narrative to the parliament. The truth is, they were insincere at first; but the reasons, proceeding from bigotry, were not suspected by James, and were at last overcome, They became sincere; but the prince, deceived by the many unavoidable causes of delay, believed that they were still deceiving him.]






2 (return) [ NOTE B, p. 42. This petition is of so great importance, that we shall here give it at length: Humbly show unto our sovereign lord the king, the lords spiritual and temporal, and commons in parliament assembled, That, whereas it is declared and enacted, by a statute made in the time of the reign of King Edward I., commonly called Statutum de Tallagio non concedendo, That no tallage or aid shall be levied by the king or his heirs in this realm, without the good will and assent of the archbishops, bishops, earls, barons, knights, burgesses, and other the freemen of the commonalty of this realm; and, by authority of parliament holden in the five and twentieth year of the reign of King Edward III., it is declared and enacted, That, from thenceforth, no person shall be compelled to make any loans to the king against his will, because such loans were against reason, and the franchise of the land; and, by other laws of this realm, it is provided, That none should be charged by any charge or imposition called a benevolence, or by such like charge; by which the statutes before mentioned, and other the good laws and statutes of this realm, your subjects have inherited this freedom, that they should not be compelled to contribute to any tax, tallage, aid, or other like charge, not set by common consent in parliament.  II. Yet, nevertheless, of late divers commissions, directed to sundry commissioners in several counties, with instructions, have issued; by means whereof your people have been in divers places assembled, and required to lend certain sums of money unto your majesty; and many of them, upon their refusal to do so, have had an oath administered unto them not warrantable by the laws or statutes of this realm, and have been constrained to become bound to make appearance and give attendance before your privy council, and in other places; and others of them have been therefore imprisoned, confined, and sundry other ways molested and disquieted; and divers other charges have been laid and levied upon your people, in several counties, by lord lieutenants, deputy lieutenants, commissioners for musters, justices of peace, and others, by command or direction from your majesty, or your privy council, against the laws and free customs of this realm.  III. And whereas also, by the statute called the Great Charter of the liberties of England, it is declared and enacted, That no freeman may be taken or imprisoned, or be disseized of his freehold or liberties, or his free customs, or be outlawed or exiled, or in any manner destroyed, but by the lawful judgment of his peers, or by the law of the land.  IV. And, in the eight and twentieth year of the reign of King Edward III., it was declared and enacted, by authority of parliament, That no man, of what estate or condition that he be, should be put out of his land or tenements, nor taken, nor imprisoned, nor dispirited, nor put to death, without being brought to answer by due process of law.  V. Nevertheless, against the tenor of the said statutes, and other the good laws and statutes of your realm to that end provided, divers of your subjects have of late been imprisoned without any cause showed; and when, for their deliverance, they were brought before justice, by your majesty’s writs of habeas corpus there to undergo and receive as the court should order, and their keepers commanded to certify the causes of their detainer, no cause was certified, but that they were detained by your majesty’s special command, signified by the lords of your privy council, and yet were returned back to several prisons, without being charged with any thing to which they might make answer according to the law.  VI. And whereas of late great companies of soldiers and mariners have been dispersed into divers counties of the realm, and the inhabitants, against their wills, have been compelled to receive them into their houses, and there to suffer them to sojourn, against the laws and customs of this realm, and to the great grievance and vexation of the people.

VII. And whereas also, by authority of parliament, in the five and twentieth year of the reign of King Edward III., it is declared and enacted, That no man should be forejudged of life or limb, against the form of the Great Charter and law of the land; and, by the said Great Charter, and other the laws and statutes of this your realm, no man ought to be judged to death but by the laws established in this your realm, either by the customs of the same realm, or by acts of parliament; and whereas no offender, of what kind soever, is exempted from the proceedings to be used, and punishments to be inflicted by the laws and statutes of this your realm; nevertheless, of late divers commissions, under your majesty’s great seal, have issued forth, by which certain persons have been assigned and appointed commissioners, with power and authority to proceed within the land, according to the justice of martial law, against such soldiers and mariners, or other dissolute persons joining with them, as should commit any murther, robbery, felony, mutiny, or other outrage or misdemeanor whatsoever, and by such summary course and order as is agreeable to martial law, and as is used in armies in time of war, to proceed to the trial and condemnation of such offenders, and them to cause to be executed and put to death according to the law martial.

VIII. By pretext whereof, some of your majesty’s subjects have been by some of the said commissioners put to death, when and where, if by the laws and statutes of the land they had deserved death, by the same laws and statutes also they might, and by no other ought, to have been judged and executed.  IX. And also sundry grievous offenders, by color thereof claiming an exemption, have escaped the punishments due to them by the laws and statutes of this your realm, by reason that divers of your officers and ministers of justice have unjustly refused or forborne to proceed against such offenders, according to the same laws and statutes, upon pretence that the said offenders were punishable only by martial law, and by authority of such commissions as aforesaid; which commissions, and all other of like nature, are wholly and directly contrary to the said laws and statutes of this your realm.  X. They do therefore humbly pray your most excellent majesty That no man hereafter be compelled to make or yield any gift, loan, benevolence, tax, or such like charge, without common consent, by act of parliament; and that none be called to make answer, or take such oath, or to give attendance, or be confined, or otherways molested or disquieted concerning the same, or for refusal thereof; and that no freeman, in any such manner as is before mentioned, be imprisoned or detained; and that your majesty would be pleased to remove the said soldiers and mariners, and that people may not be so burdened in time to come; and that the aforesaid commissions, for proceeding by martial law, may be revoked and annulled; and that hereafter no commissions of like nature may issue forth, to any person or persons whatsoever, to be executed as aforesaid, lest, by color of them, any of your majesty’s subjects be destroyed, or put to death, contrary to the laws and franchise of the land.  XL All which they most humbly pray of your most excellent majesty, as their rights and liberties, according to the laws and statutes of this realm; and that your majesty would also vouchsafe to declare, That the awards, doings, and proceedings to the prejudice of your people, in any of the premises, shall not be drawn hereafter into consequence or example; and that your majesty would be also graciously pleased, for the further comfort and safety of your people, to declare your royal will and pleasure, that in the things aforesaid, all your officers and ministers shall serve you according to the laws and statutes of this realm, as they tender the honor of your majesty, and the prosperity of this kingdom. Stat. 17 Car. cap. 14.]






3 (return) [ NOTE C, p. 52. The reason assigned by Sir Philip Warwick (p. 2) for this unusual measure of the commons, is, that they intended to deprive the crown of the prerogative which it had assumed, of varying the rates of the impositions, and at the same time were resolved to cut off the new rates fixed by James. These were considerable diminutions both of revenue and prerogative; and whether they would have there stopped, considering their present disposition, may be much doubted. The king, it seems, and the lords were resolved not to trust them; nor to render a revenue once precarious, which perhaps they might never afterwards be able to get reestablished on the old footing.]






4 (return) [ NOTE D, p. 80. Here is a passage of Sir John Davis’s Question concerning Impositions, (p. 131.)

“This power of laying on arbitrarily new impositions being a prerogative in point of government, as well as in point of profit, it cannot be restrained or bound by act of parliament; it can not be limited by any certain or fixt rule of law, no more than the course of a pilot upon the sea, who must turn the helm or bear higher or lower sail, according to the wind or weather; and therefore it may be properly said, that the king’s prerogative, in this point, is as strong as Samson; it cannot be bound; for though an act of parliament be made to restrain it, and the king doth give his consent unto it, as Samson was bound with his own consent; yet if the Philistines come, that is, if any just or important occasion do arise, it cannot hold or restrain the prerogative; it will be as thread, and broken as easy as the bonds of Samson. The king’s prerogatives are the sunbeams of the crown, and as inseparable from it as the sunbeams from the sun. The king’s crown must be taken from him; Samson’s hair must be cut off, before his courage can be any jot abated. Hence it is that neither the king’s act, nor any act of parliament, can give away his prerogative.”]






5 (return) [ NOTE E, p. 121. We shall here make use of the liberty allowed in a note to expatiate a little on the present subject. It must be confessed, that the king in this declaration touched upon that circumstance in the English constitution which it is most difficult, or rather altogether impossible, to regulate by laws, and which must be governed by certain delicate ideas of propriety and decency, rather than by any exact rule or prescription. To deny the parliament all right of remonstrating against what they esteem grievances, were to reduce that assembly to a total insignificancy, and to deprive the people of every advantage which they could reap from popular councils. To complain of the parliament’s employing the power of taxation as the means of extorting concessions from their sovereign, were to expect that they would entirely disarm themselves, and renounce the sole expedient provided by the constitution for insuring to the kingdom a just and legal administration. In different periods of English story, there occur instances of their remonstrating with their princes in the freest manner, and sometimes of their refusing supply when disgusted with any circumstance of public conduct. It is, however, certain, that this power, though essential to parliaments, may easily be abused, as well by the frequency and minuteness of their remonstrances, as by their intrusion into every part of the king’s counsels and determinations. Under color of advice, they may give disguised orders; and in complaining of grievances, they may draw to themselves every power of government. Whatever measure is embraced without consulting them, may be pronounced an oppression of the people; and, till corrected, they may refuse the most necessary supplies to their indigent sovereign. From the very nature of this parliamentary liberty, it is evident that it must be left unbounded by law; for who can foretell how frequently grievances may occur, or what part of administration may be affected by them? From the nature, too, of the human frame, it may be expected, that this liberty would be exerted in its full extent, and no branch of authority be allowed to remain unmolested in the hands of the prince; for will the weak limitations of respect and decorum be sufficient to restrain human ambition, which so frequently breaks through all the prescriptions of law and justice?  But here it is observable, that the wisdom of the English constitution, or rather the concurrence of accidents, has provided, in different periods, certain irregular checks to this privilege of parliament and thereby maintained, in some tolerable measure, the dignity and authority of the crown.

In the ancient constitution, before the beginning of the seventeenth century, the meetings of parliament were precarious, and were not frequent. The sessions were short, and the members had no leisure either to get acquainted with each other, or with public business. The ignorance of the age made men more submissive to that authority which governed them.

And above all, the large demesnes of the crown, with the small expense of government during that period, rendered the prince almost independent, and taught the parliament to preserve great submission and duty towards him.

In our present constitution, many accidents which have rendered governments every where, as well as in Great Britain, much more burdensome than formerly, have thrown into the hands of the crown the disposal of a large revenue, and have enabled the king, by the private interest and ambition of the members, to restrain the public interest and ambition of the body. While the opposition (for we must still have an opposition, open or disguised,) endeavors to draw every branch of administration under the cognizance of parliament, the courtiers reserve a part to the disposal of the crown; and the royal prerogative, though deprived of its ancient powers, still maintains a due weight in the balance of the constitution.

It was the fate of the house of Stuart to govern England at a period when the former source of authority was already much diminished, and before the latter began to flow in any tolerable abundance. Without a regular and fixed foundation, the throne perpetually tottered; and the prince sat upon it anxiously and precariously. Every expedient used by James and Charles in order to support their dignity, we have seen attended with sensible inconveniencies. The majesty of the crown, derived from ancient powers and prerogatives, procured respect, and checked the approaches of insolent intruders. But it begat in the king so high an idea of his own rank and station, as made him incapable of stooping to popular courses, or submitting, in any degree, to the control of parliament. The alliance with the hierarchy strengthened law by the sanction of religion; but it enraged the Puritanical party, and exposed the prince to the attacks of enemies, numerous, violent, and implacable. The memory, too, of these two kings, from like causes, has been attended, in some degree, with the same infelicity which pursued them during the whole course of their lives. Though it must be confessed, that their skill in government was not proportioned to the extreme delicacy of their situation, a sufficient indulgence has not been given them, and all the blame, by several historians, has been unjustly thrown on their side. Their violations of law, particularly those of Charles, are, in some few instances, transgressions of a plain limit which was marked out to loyal authority.

But the encroachments of the commons, though in the beginning less positive and determinate, are no less discernible by good judges, and were equally capable of destroying the just balance of the constitution. While they exercised the powers transmitted to them in a manner more independent, and less compliant, than had ever before been practised, the kings were, perhaps imprudently, but as they imagined, from necessity, tempted to assume powers which had scarcely ever been exercised, or had been exercised in a different manner by the crown. And from the shock of these opposite pretensions, together with religious controversy, arose all the factions, convulsions, and disorders which attended that period.

“This footnote was in the first editions a part of the text.]






6 (return) [ NOTE F, p. 166. Mr. Carte, in his Life of the duke of Ormond, has given us some evidence to prove that this letter was entirely a forgery of the popular leaders, in order to induce the king to sacrifice Strafford. He tells us, that Strafford said so to his son the night before his execution, But there are some reasons why I adhere to the common way of telling this story. 1. The account of the forgery comes through several hands, and from men of characters not fully known to the public; a circumstance which weakens every evidence. It is a hearsay of a hearsay. 2. It seems impossible but young Lord Strafford must inform the king, who would not have failed to trace the forgery, and expose his enemies to their merited infamy. 3. It is not to be conceived but Clarendon and Whitlocke, not to mention others, must have heard of the matter. 4. Sir George Ratcliffe, in his Life of Strafford, tells the story the same way that Clarendon and Whitlocke do.

Would he also, who was Strafford’s intimate friend, never have heard of the forgery? It is remarkable, that this Life is dedicated or addressed to young Strafford. Would not he have put Sir George right in so material and interesting a fact?]






7 (return) [ NOTE G, p. 167. What made this bill appear of less consequence was, that the parliament voted tonnage and poundage for no longer a period than two months; and as that branch was more than half of the revenue, and the government could not possibly subsist without it, it seemed indirectly in the power of the parliament to continue themselves as long as they pleased. This indeed was true in the ordinary administration of government; but on the approaches towards a civil war, which was not then foreseen, it had been of great consequence to the king to have reserved the right of dissolution, and to have endured any extremity rather than allow the continuance of the parliament.]






8 (return) [ NOTE H, p. 190. It is now so universally allowed, notwithstanding some muttering to the contrary, that the king had no hand in the Irish rebellion, that it will be superfluous to insist on a point which seems so clear. I shall only suggest a very few arguments, among an infinite number which occur. 1.

Ought the affirmation of perfidious, infamous rebels ever to have passed for any authority? 2. Nobody can tell us what the words of the pretended commission were. That commission, which we find in Rush, (vol. v. p. 400,)

and in Milton’s Works, (Toland’s edition,) is plainly an imposture; because it pretends to be dated in October, 1641, yet mentions facts which happened not till some months after. It appears that the Irish rebels, observing some inconsistence in their first forgery, were obliged to forge this commission anew, yet could not render it coherent or probable. 3.

Nothing could be more obviously pernicious to the king’s cause than the Irish rebellion: because it increased his necessities, and rendered him still more dependent on the parliament, who had before sufficiently shown on what terms they would assist him. 4. The instant the king heard of the rebellion, which was a very few days after its commencement, he wrote to the parliament, and gave over to them the management of the war. Had he built any projects on that rebellion, would he not have waited some little time, to see how they would succeed? Would he presently have adopted a measure which was evidently so hurtful to his authority? 5. What can be imagined to be the king’s projects? To raise the Irish to arms, I suppose, and bring them over to England for his assistance. But is it not plain, that the king never intended to raise war in England? Had that been his intention, would he have rendered the parliament perpetual? Does it not appear, by the whole train of events, that the parliament forced him into the war? 6. The king conveyed to the justices intelligence which ought to have prevented the rebellion. 7. The Irish Catholics, in all their future transactions with the king, where they endeavor to excuse their insurrection, never had the assurance to plead his commission. Even amongst themselves they dropped that pretext. It appears that Sir Phelim O’Neale chiefly, and he only at first, promoted that imposture. See Carte’s Ormond, vol. iii. No. 100, 111, 112, 114, 115, 121, 132, 137. 8.

O’Neale himself confessed the imposture on his trial, and at his execution. See Nalson, vol. ii. p. 528. Maguire, at his execution, made a like confession. 9. It is ridiculous to mention the justification which Charles II. gave to the marquis of Antrim, as if he had acted by his father’s commission. Antrim had no hand in the first rebellion and the massacre. He joined not the rebels till two years after; it was with the king’s consent, and he did important service in sending over a body of men to Montrose.]






9 (return) [ NOTE I, p. 220. The great courage and conduct displayed by many of the popular leaders, have commonly inclined men to do them, in one respect, more honor than they deserve, and to suppose that, like able politicians, they employed pretences which they secretly despised, in order to serve their selfish purposes. It is, however, probable, if not certain, that they were, generally speaking, the dupes of their own zeal. Hypocrisy, quite pure and free from fanaticism, is perhaps, except among men fixed in a determined philosophical scepticism, then unknown, as rare as fanaticism entirely purged from all mixture of hypocrisy. So congenial to the human mind are religions sentiments, that it is impossible to counterfeit long these holy fervors, without feeling some share of the assumed warmth: and, on the other hand, so precarious and temporary, from the frailty of human nature, is the operation of these spiritual views, that the religious ecstasies, if constantly employed, must often be counterfeit, and must be warped by those more familiar motives of interest and ambition, which insensibly gain upon the mind. This indeed teems the key to most of the celebrated characters of that age. Equally full of fraud and of ardor, these pious patriots talked perpetually of seeking the Lord, yet still pursued their own purposes; and have left a memorable lesson to posterity, how delusive, how destructive that principle is by which they were animated.

With regard to the people, we can entertain no doubt that the controversy was, on their part, entirely theological. The generality of the nation could never have flown out into such fury, in order to obtain new privileges, and acquire greater liberty than they and their ancestors had ever been acquainted with. Their fathers had been entirely satisfied with the government of Elizabeth. Why should they have been thrown into such extreme rage against Charles, who, from the beginning of his reign, wished only to maintain such a government? And why not at least compound matters with him, when, by all his laws, it appeared that he had agreed to depart from it? especially AS he had put it entirely out of his power to retract that resolution. It is in vain, therefore, to dignify this civil war, and the parliamentary authors of it, by supposing it to have any other considerable foundation than theological zeal, that great source of animosity among men. The royalists also were very commonly zealots; but as they were at the same time maintaining the established constitution in state as well as church, they had an object which was natural, and which might produce the greatest passion, even without any considerable mixture of theological fervor.  The former part of this footnote was in the first editions a part of the text]






11 (return) [ NOTE K, p. 221. In some of these declarations, supposed to be penned by Lord Falkland, is found the first regular definition of the constitution, according to our present ideas of it, that occurs in any English composition; at least any published by authority. The three species of government, monarchical, aristocratical, and democratical, are there plainly distinguished, and the English government is expressly said to be none of them pure, but all of them mixed and tempered together. This style, though the sense of it was implied in many institutions, no former king of England would have used, and no subject would have been permitted to use. Banks and the crown lawyers against Hambden, in the case of ship money, insist plainly and openly on the king’s absolute and sovereign power; and the opposite lawyers do not deny it; they only assert, that the subjects have also a fundamental property in their goods, and that no part of them can be taken but by their own consent in parliament. But that the parliament was instituted to check and control the king, and share the supreme power, would in all former times have been esteemed very blunt and indiscreet, if not illegal language. We need not be surprised that governments should long continue, though the boundaries of authority in their several branches be implicit, confused, and undetermined. This is the case all over the world. Who can draw an exact line between the spiritual and temporal powers in Catholic states? What code ascertained the precise authority of the Roman senate in every occurrence? Perhaps the English is the first mixed government where the authority of every part has been very accurately defined; and yet there still remain many very important questions between the two houses, that, by common consent, are buried in a discreet silence. The king’s power is, indeed, more exactly limited; but this period of which we now treat is the time a which that accuracy commenced. And it appears from Warwick and Hobbes, that many royalists blamed this philosophical precision in the king’s penman, and thought that the veil was very imprudently drawn off the mysteries of government. It is certain that liberty reaped mighty advantages from these controversies and inquiries; and the royal authority itself became more secure within those provinces which were assigned to it.  Since the first publication of this History, the sequel of Lord Clarendon has been published; where that nobleman asserts, that he himself was the author of most of these remonstrances and memorials of the king.]






12 (return) [ NOTE L, p. 240.

Whitlocke, who was one of the commissioners, says, (p. 65,) “In this treaty the king manifested his great parts and abilities, strength of reason and quickness of apprehension, with much patience in hearing what was objected against him; wherein he allowed all freedom and would himself sum up the arguments, and give a most clear judgment upon them. His unhappiness was, that he had a better opinion of others’ judgments than of his own, though they were weaker than his own; and of this the parliament commissioners had experience to their great trouble. They were often waiting on the king, and debating some points of the treaty with him until midnight, before they could come to a conclusion. Upon one of the most material points, they pressed his majesty with their reasons and best arguments they could use to grant what they desired. The king said he was fully satisfied, and promised to give them his answer in writing according to their desire; but because it was then past midnight, and too late to put it into writing, he would have it drawn up next morning, when he commanded them to wait on him again, and then he would give them his answer in writing as it was now agreed upon. But next morning the king told them that he had altered his mind; and some of his friends, of whom the commissioners inquired, told them, that after they were gone, and even his council retired, some of his bed-chamber never left pressing and persuading him till they prevailed on him to change his former resolutions.” It is difficult, however, to conceive that any negotiation could have succeeded between the king and parliament, while the latter insisted, as they did all along, on a total submission to all their demands; and challenged the whole power, which they professedly intended to employ to the punishment of all the king’s friends.]






13 (return) [ NOTE M, p. 247. The author is sensible that some blame may be thrown upon him, on account of this last clause in Mr. Hambden’s character; as if he were willing to entertain a suspicion of bad intentions where the actions were praiseworthy. But the author’s meaning is directly contrary. He esteems the last actions of Mr. Hambden’s life to hare been very blamable; though, as they were derived from good motives, only pushed to an extreme, there is room left to believe that the intentions of that patriot, as well as of many of his party, were laudable. Had the preceding administration of the king, which we are apt to call arbitrary, proceeded from ambition, and an unjust desire of encroaching on the ancient liberties of the people, there would have been less reason for giving him any trust, or leaving in his hands a considerable share of that power which he had so much abused. But if his conduct was derived in a great measure from necessity, and from a natural desire of defending that prerogative which was transmitted to him from his ancestors, and which his parliaments were visibly encroaching on, there is no reason why he may not be esteemed a very virtuous prince, and entirely worthy of trust from his people. The attempt, therefore, of totally annihilating monarchical power, was a very blamable extreme; especially as it was attended with the danger, to say the least, of a civil war, which, besides the numberless ills inseparable from it, exposed liberty to much greater perils than it could have incurred under the now limited authority of the king. But as these points could not be supposed be clear during the time as they are, or may be, at present, there are great reasons of alleviation for men who were heated by the controversy, or engaged in the action. And it is remarkable, that even at present,

(such is the force of party prejudices,) there are few people who have coolness enough to see these matters in a proper light, or are convinced that the parliament could prudently have stopped in their pretensions.

They still plead the violations of liberty attempted by the king, after granting the petition of right; without considering the extreme harsh treatment which he met with after making that great concession, and the impossibility of supporting government by the revenue then settled on the crown. The worst of it is, that there was a great tang of enthusiasm in the conduct of the parliamentary leaders, which, though it might render their conduct sincere, will not much enhance their character with posterity. And though Hambden was, perhaps, less infected with this spirit than many of his associates, he appears not to have been altogether free from it. Eds intended migration to America, where he could only propose the advantage of enjoying Puritanical prayers and sermons, will be allowed a proof of the prevalence of this spirit in him.]






14 (return) [ NOTE N, p. 260. In a letter of the king to the queen, preserved in the British Museum, and published by Mrs. Macaulay, (vol. iv. p. 420,) he says, that unless religion was preserved, the militia (being not, as in France, a formed powerful strength) would be of little use to the crown; and that if the pulpits had not obedience, which would never be if Presbyterian government was absolutely established, the king would have but small comfort of the militia. This reasoning shows the king’s good sense, and proves that his attachment to Episcopacy, though partly founded on religious principles, was also, in his situation, derived from the soundest views of civil policy. In reality, it was easy for the king to perceive, by the necessary connection between trifles and important matters, and by the connection maintained at that time between religion and politics, that, when he was contending for the surplice, he was in effect fighting for his crown, and even for his head. Few of the popular party could perceive this connection. Most of them were carried headlong by fanaticism; as might be expected in the ignorant multitude. Few even of the leaders seem to have had more enlarged views.]






15 (return) [ NOTE O, p. 298. That Laud’s severity was not extreme, appears from this feet, that he caused the acts or records of the high commission court to be searched, and found that there had been fewer suspensions, deprivations, and other punishments, by three, during the seven years of his time, than hi any seven years of his predecessor, Abbott, who was, notwithstanding, in great esteem with the house of commons. Troubles and Trials of Laud, p. 164. But Abbot was little attached to the court, and was also a Puritan in doctrine, and bore a mortal hatred to the Papists. Not to mention, that the mutinous spirit was rising higher in the time of Laud, and would less bear control. The maxims, however, of his administration were the same that had ever prevailed in England, and that had place in every other European nation, except Holland, which studied chiefly the interests of commerce, and France, which was fettered by edicts and treaties. To have changed them for the modern maxims of toleration, how reasonable soever, would have been deemed a very bold and dangerous enterprise. It is a principle advanced by President Montesquieu, that where the magistrate, is satisfied with the established religion, he ought to repress the first attempts towards innovation, and only grant a toleration to sects that are diffused and established. See L’Esprit des Loix, liv. 25, chap. 10.

According to this principle, Laud’s indulgence to the Catholics, and severity to the Puritans, would admit of apology. I own, however, that it is very questionable, whether persecution can in any case be justified; but, at the same time, it would be hard to give that appellation to Laud’s conduct, who only enforced the act of uniformity, and expelled the clergymen that accepted of benefices, and yet refused to observe the ceremonies which they previously knew to be enjoined by law. He never refused them separate places of worship, because they themselves would have esteemed it impious to demand them, and no less impious to allow them.]






16 (return) [ NOTE P, p. 319. Dr. Birch has written a treatise on this subject It is not my business to oppose any facts contained in that gentleman’s performance. I shall only produce arguments, which prove that Glamorgan, when he received his private commission, had injunctions from the king to net altogether in concert with Ormond. 1. It seems to be implied in the very words of the commission. Glamorgan is empowered and authorized to treat and conclude with the confederate Roman Catholics in Ireland. “If upon necessity any

(articles) be condescended unto, wherein the king’s lieutenant cannot so well be seen in, as not fit for us at present publicly to own.” Here no articles are mentioned which are not fit to be communicated to Ormond, but only not fit for him and the king publicly to be seen in, and to avow. 2.

The king’s protestation to Ormond ought, both on account of that prince’s character, and the reasons he assigns, to have the greatest weight. The words are these: “Ormond, I cannot but add to my long letter, that, upon the word of a Christian, I never intended Glamorgan should treat any thing without your approbation, much less without your knowledge. For besides the injury to you, I was always diffident of his judgment (though I could not think him so extremely weak as now to my cost I have found;) which you may easily perceive in a postscript of a letter of mine to you.” Carte, vol. ii. App. xxiii. It is impossible that any man of honor, however he might dissemble with his enemies, would assert a falsehood in so solemn a manner to his best friend, especially where that person must have had opportunities of knowing the truth. The letter, whose postscript is mentioned by the king, is to be found in Carte, vol. ii. App. xiii. 3. As the king had really so low an opinion of Glamorgan’s understanding, it is very unlikely that he would trust him with the sole management of so important and delicate a treaty. And if he had intended that Glamorgan’s negotiation should have been independent of Ormond, he would never have told the latter nobleman of it, nor have put him on his guard against Glamorgan’s imprudence. That the king judged aright of this nobleman’s character, appears from his Century of Arts, or Scantling of Inventions, which is a ridiculous compound of Hes, chimeras, and impossibilities, and shows what might be expected from such a man. 4. Mr. Carte has published a whole series of the king’s correspondence with Ormond, from the time that Glamorgan came into Ireland; and it is evident that Charles all along considers the lord lieutenant as the person who was conducting the negotiations with the Irish. The 31st of July, 1645, after the battle of Naseby, being reduced to great straits, he writes earnestly to Ormond, to conclude a peace upon certain conditions mentioned, much inferior to those granted by Glamorgan; and to come over himself with all the Irish he could engage in his service. Carte, vol. iii. No. 400. This would have been a great absurdity, if he had already fixed a different canal, by which, on very different conditions, he purposed to establish a peace On the 22d of October, as his distresses multiply, he somewhat enlarges the conditions, though they still fall short of Glamorgan’s; a new absurdity! See Carte, vol. iii. p. 411. 5. But What is equivalent to a demonstration that Glamorgan was conscious that he had no powers to conclude a treaty on these terms, or without consulting the lord lieutenant, and did not even expect that the king would ratify the articles, is the defeasance which he gave to the Irish council at the time of signing the treaty. “The earl of Glamorgan does no way intend hereby to oblige his majesty other than he himself shall please, after he has received these ten thousand men as a pledge and testimony of the said Roman Catholics’ loyalty and fidelity to his majesty; yet he promises faithfully, upon his word and honor, not to acquaint his majesty with this defeasance, till he had endeavored, as far as in him lay, to induce his majesty to the granting of the particulars in the said articles; but that done, the said commissioners discharge the said earl of Glamorgan, both in honor and conscience, of any further engagement to them therein; though his majesty should not be pleased to grant the said particulars in the articles mentioned; the said earl having given them assurance, upon his word, honor, and voluntary oath, that he would never, to any person whatsoever, discover this defeasance in the interim without their consents.” Dr. Birch, p. 96. All Glamorgan’s view was to get troops for the king’s service without hurting his own honor or his master’s. The wonder only is, why the Irish accepted of a treaty which bound nobody, and which the very person who concludes it, seems to confess he does not expect to be ratified. They probably hoped that the king would, from their services, be more easily induced to ratify a treaty which was concluded, than to consent to its conclusion. 6. I might add, that the lord lieutenant’s concurrence in the treaty was the more requisite, because without it the treaty could not be carried into execution by Glamorgan, nor the Irish troops be transported into England; and even with Ormond’s concurrence, it clearly appears, that a treaty so ruinous to the Protestant religion in Ireland, could not be executed in opposition to the zealous Protestants in that kingdom. No one can doubt of this truth, who peruses Ormond’s correspondence in Mr. Carte. The king was sufficiently apprised of this difficulty. It appears indeed to be the only reason why Ormond objected to the granting of high terms to the Irish Catholics.  Dr. Birch (in p. 360) has published a letter of the king’s to Glamorgan, where he says, “Howbeit I know you cannot be but confident of my making good all instructions and promises to you and the nuncio.” But it is to be remarked, that this letter is dated in April 6th,

1646; after there had been a new negotiation entered into between Glamorgan and the Irish, and after a provisional treaty had even been concluded between them. See Dr. Birch, p. 179. The king’s assurances, therefore, can plainly relate only to this recent transaction. The old treaty had long been disavowed by the king, and supposed by all parties to be annulled.]






17 (return) [ NOTE Q, p. 347. Salmonet, Ludlow, Hollis, etc., all these, especially the last, being the declared inveterate enemies of Cromwell, are the more to be credited, when they advance any fact which may serve to apologize for his violent and criminal conduct. There prevails a story, that Cromwell intercepted a letter written to the queen, where the king said, that he would first raise, and then destroy Cromwell. But, besides that this conduct seems to contradict the character of the king, it is, on other accounts, totally unworthy of credit. It is first told by Roger Coke, a very passionate and foolish historian, who wrote, too, so late as King William’s reign; and even he mentions it only as a mere rumor or hearsay, without any known foundation.

In the memoirs of Lord Broghill, we meet with another story of an intercepted letter, which deserves some more attention, and agrees very well with the narration here given. It is thus related by Mr. Maurice, chaplain to Roger, earl of Orrery: “Lord Orrery, in the time of his greatness with Cromwell, just after he had so seasonably relieved him in his great distress at Clonmell, riding out of Youghall one day with him and Ireton, they fell into discourse about the king’s death. Cromwell thereupon said more than once, that if the king had followed his own judgment, and had been attended by none but trusty servants, he had fooled them all; and that once they had a mind to have closed with him; but, upon something that happened, fell off from that design. Orrery, finding them in good humor, and being alone with them, asked if he might presume to desire to know why they would once have closed with his majesty, and why they did not. Cromwell very freely told him, he would satisfy him in both his queries. The reason, says he, why we would have closed with the king was this: we found that the Scotch and Presbyterians began to be more powerful than we, and were likely to agree with him, and leave us in the lurch. For this reason, we thought it best to prevent them, by offering first to come in upon reasonable conditions; but whilst our thoughts were taken up with this subject, there came a letter to us from one of our spies, who was of the king’s bedchamber, acquainting us, that our final doom was decreed that very day; that he could not possibly learn what it was, but we might discover it, if we could but intercept a letter sent from the king to the queen, wherein he informed her of his resolution; that this letter was sown up in the skirt of a saddle, and the bearer of it would come with the saddle upon his head, about ten of the clock that night, to the Blue Boar in Holborn, where he was to take horse for Dover.

The messenger knew nothing of the letter in the saddle, though some in Dover did. ‘We were at Windsor,’ said Cromwell, ‘when we received this letter; and immediately upon the receipt of it, Ireton and I resolved to take one trusty fellow with us, and to go in troopers’ habits to that inn.

We did so; and leaving our man at the gate of the inn, (which had a wicket only open to let persons in and out,) to watch and give us notice when any man came in with a saddle, we went into a drinking-stall. We there continued, drinking cans of beer, till about ten of the clock, when our sentinel at the gate gave us notice that the man with the saddle was come.

We rose up presently, and just as the man was leading out his horse saddled, we came up to him with drawn swords, and told him we were to search all that went in and out there: but as he looked like an honest man, we would only search his saddle, and so dismiss him. The saddle was ungirt; we carried it into the stall where we had been drinking and ripping open one of the skirts, we there found the letter we wanted.

Having thus got it into our hands, we delivered the man (whom we had left with our sentinel) his saddle, told him he was an honest fellow, and bid him go about his business; which he did, pursuing his journey without more ado, and ignorant of the harm he had suffered. We found in the letter, that his majesty acquainted the queen that he was courted by both factions, the Scotch Presbyterians and the army: and that those which bade the fairest for him should have him. But yet he thought he should close with the Scots sooner than with the other. Upon this we returned to Windsor; and finding we were not like to have good terms from the king, we from that time vowed his destruction.’ This relation suiting well enough with other passages and circumstances at this time, I have inserted to gratify the reader’s curiosity.” Carte’s Ormond, vol. ii. p. 12.]






18 (return) [ NOTE R, p. 349. These are the words: “Laneric; I wonder to hear (if that be true) that some of my friends say, that my going to Jersey would have much more furthered my personal treaty, than my coming hither, for which, as I see no color of reason, so I had not been here, if I had thought that fancy true, or had not been secured of a personal treaty; of which I neither do, nor I hope will repent; for I am daily more and more satisfied with the governor, and find these islanders very good, peaceable, and quiet people. This encouragement I have thought not unfit for you to receive; hoping at least it may do good upon others, though needless to you.” Burnet’s Memoirs of Hamilton, p. 326. See also Rushworth, part 4, vol. ii. p. 941. All the writers of that age, except Clarendon, represent the king’s going to the Isle of Wight as voluntary and intended. Perhaps the king thought it little for his credit to be trepanned into this measure, and was more willing to take it on himself as entirely voluntary. Perhaps he thought it would encourage his friends, if they thought him in a situation which was not disagreeable to him.]






19 (return) [ NOTE S, p. 364. The king composed a letter to the prince, in which he related the whole course of this transaction, and accompanied his narrative with several wise, as well as pathetical reflections and advices. The words with which he concluded the letter, are remarkable: “By what hath been said, you see how long I have labored in the search of peace. Do not you be disheartened to tread in the same steps. Use all worthy means to restore yourself to your rights, but prefer the way of peace. Show the greatness of your mine, rather to conquer your enemies by pardoning than by punishing. If you saw how unmanly and unchristian the implacable disposition is in our ill-wishers, you would avoid that spirit. Censure me not for having parted with so much of our right. The price was great, but the commodity was security to us, peace to my people. And I am confident, that another parliament would remember how useful a king’s power is to a people’s liberty; of how much power I divested myself, that I and they might meet once again in a parliamentary way, in order to agree the bounds of prince and people. Give belief to my experience, never to affect more greatness or prerogative than what is really and intrinsically for the good of the subjects, not the satisfaction of favorites If you thus use it, you will never want means to be a father to all, and a bountiful prince to any whom you incline to be extraordinarily gracious to. You may perceive, that all men intrust their treasure where it returns them interest; and if a prince, like the sea, receive and repay all the fresh streams which the rivers intrust with him, they will not grudge, but pride themselves to make him up an ocean. These considerations may make you as great a prince as your father if a low one; and your state may be so much the more established, as mine hath been shaken. For our subjects have learned, I dare say, that victories over their princes are but triumphs over themselves, and so will more unwillingly hearken to changes hereafter. The English nation are a sober people, however at present infatuated. I know not but this may be the last time I may speak to you or the world publicly. I am sensible into what hands I am fallen; and yet, I bless God, I have those inward refreshments which the malice of my enemies cannot perturb. I have learned to be busy myself, by retiring into myself; and therefore can the better digest whatever befalls me, not doubting but God’s providence will restrain our enemies’ power, and turn their fierceness into his praise. To conclude, if God give you success, use it humbly, and be ever far from revenge. If he restore you to your right on hard conditions, whatever you promise, keep These men who have violated laws which they were bound to preserve, will find their triumphs full of trouble. But do not you think any thing in the world worth attaining by foul and unjust means.”]






20 (return) [ NOTE T, p. 380. The imputation of insincerity on Charles I., like most party clamors, is difficult to be removed; though it may not here be improper to say something with regard to it. I shall first remark, that this imputation seems to be of a later growth than his own age; and that even his enemies, though they loaded him with many calumnies, did not insist on this accusation. Ludlow, I think, is almost the only parliamentarian who imputes that vice to him; and how passionate a writer he is, must be obvious to every one. Neither Clarendon nor any other of the royalists ever justify him from insincerity, as not supposing that he had ever been accused of it. In the second place, his deportment and character in common life was free from that vice. He was reserved, distant, stately; cold in his address, plain in his discourse, inflexible in his principles; wide of the caressing, insinuating manners of his son, or the professing, talkative humor of his father. The imputation of insincerity must be grounded on some of his public actions, which we are therefore in the third place to examine. The following are the only instances which I find cited to confirm that accusation. 1. His vouching Buckingham’s narrative of the transactions in Spain. But it is evident that Charles himself was deceived: why otherwise did he quarrel with Spain? The following is a passage of a letter from Lord Kensington, ambassador in France, to the duke of Buckingham Cabbala p. 318. “But his highness (the prince) had observed as great a weakness and folly as that, in that after they (the Spaniards) had used him so ill, they would suffer him to depart, which was one of the first speeches he uttered after he came into the ship. But did he say so? said the queen (of France.) Yes, madam, I will assure you, quoth I, from the witness of mine own ears. She smiled, and replied, Indeed, I heard he was used ill. So he was, answered I, but not in his entertainment; for that was as splendid as that country could afford it; but in their frivolous delays, and in the unreasonable conditions which they propounded and pressed, upon the advantage they had of his princely person.” 2. Bishop Burnet, in his History of the House of Hamilton, (p.

154.) has preserved a letter of the king’s to the Scottish bishops, in which he desires them not to be present at the parliament, where they would be forced to ratify the abolition of their own order. “For,” adds the king, “we do hereby assure you, that it shall be still one of our chiefest studies how to rectify and establish the government of that church aright, and to repair your losses, which we desire you to be most confident of.” And in another place, “You may rest secure, that though perhaps we may give way for the present to that which will be prejudicial both to the church and our own government, yet we shall not leave thinking in time how to remedy both.” But does the king say that he will arbitrarily revoke his concessions? Does not candor require us rather to suppose, that he hoped his authority would so far recover as to enable him to obtain the national consent to reestablish Episcopacy, which he believed so material a part of religion as well as of government? It is not easy indeed to think how he could hope to effect this purpose in any other way than his father had taken, that is, by consent of parliament. 3.

There is a passage in Lord Clarendon, where it is said, that the king assented the more easily to the bill which excluded the bishops from the house of peers, because he thought that that law, being enacted by force, could not be valid. But the king certainly reasoned right in that conclusion. Three fourths of the temporal peers were at that time banished by the violence of the populace. Twelve bishops were unjustly thrown into the Tower by the commons. Great numbers of the commons themselves were kept away by fear or violence. The king himself was chased from London. If all this be not force, there is no such thing. But this scruple of the king’s affects only the bishops’ bill, and that against pressing. The other constitutional laws had passed without the least appearance of violence, as did indeed all the bills passed during the first year, except Strafford’s attainder, which could not be recalled. The parliament, therefore, even if they had known the king’s sentiments in this particular, could not, on that account, have had any just foundation of jealousy. 4. The king’s letter intercepted at Naseby has been the source of much clamor. We have spoken of it already in chapter lviii. Nothing is more usual in all public transactions than such distinctions. Alter the death of Charles II. of Spain, King William’s ambassadors gave the duke of Anjou the title of King of Spain; yet at that very time, King William was secretly forming alliances to dethrone him and soon after he refused him that title, and insisted (as he had reason) that he had not acknowledged his right. Yet King William justly passes for a very sincere prince; and this transaction is not regarded as any objection to his character in that particular. In all the negotiations at the peace of Ryswic, the French ambassadors always addressed King William as king of England; yet it was made an express article of the treaty, that the French king should acknowledge him as such. Such a palpable difference is there between giving a title to a prince, and positively recognizing his right to it. I may add, that Charles, when he asserted that protestation in the council books before his council, surely thought he had reason to justify his conduct. There were too many men of honor in that company to avow a palpable cheat. To which we may subjoin, that, if men were as much disposed to judge of this prince’s actions with candor as severity, this precaution of entering a protest in his council books might rather pass for a proof of scrupulous honor; lest he should afterwards be reproached with breach of his word, when he should think proper again to declare the assembly at Westminster no parliament. 5. The denying of his commission to Glamorgan is another instance which has been cited. This matter has been already treated in a footnote to chapter lviii. That transaction was entirely innocent. Even if the king had given a commission to Glamorgan to conclude that treaty, and had ratified it, will any reasonable man, in our age, think it strange that, in order to save his own life, his crown, his family, his friends, and his party, he should make a treaty with Papists, and grant them very large concessions for their religion? 6. There is another of the king’s intercepted letters to the queen commonly mentioned; where, it is pretended, he talked of raising and then destroying Cromwell.

But that story stands on no manner of foundation, as we have observed in a preceding footnote to this chapter. In a word, the parliament, after the commencement of their violences, and still more after beginning the civil war, had reason for their scruples and jealousies, founded on the very nature of their situation, and on the general propensity of the human mind; not on any fault of the king’s character, who was candid, sincere, upright; as much as any man whom we meet with in history. Perhaps it would be difficult to find another character so unexceptionable in this particular.  As to the other circumstances of Charles’s character chiefly exclaimed against, namely, his arbitrary principles in government, one may venture to assert, that the greatest enemies of this prince will not find, in the long line of his predecessors, from the conquest to his time, any one king, except perhaps his father, whose administration was not more arbitrary and less legal, or whose conduct could have been recommended to him, by the popular party themselves, as a model, in this particular, for his government. Nor is it sufficient to say, that example and precedent can never authorize vices. Examples and precedents, uniform and ancient, can surely fix the nature of any constitution, and the limits of any form of government. There is indeed no other principle by which those landmarks or boundaries can be settled.

What a paradox in human affairs, that Henry VIII. should have been almost adored in his lifetime, and his memory be respected; while Charles I. should, by the same people, at no greater distance than a century, have been led to a public and ignominious execution, and his name be ever after pursued by falsehood and by obloquy!  Even at present, an historian, who, prompted by his courageous generosity, should venture, though from the most authentic and undisputed facts, to vindicate the fame of that prince, would be sure to meet with such treatment as would discourage even the boldest from so dangerous, however splendid an enterprise.]






21 (return) [ NOTE U, p. 394. The following instance of extravagance is given by Walker, in his History of Independency, part ii. p. 152. About this time there came six soldiers into the parish church of Walton upon Thames, near twilight; Mr. Faucet, the preacher there, not having till then ended his sermon. One of the soldiers had a lantern in his hand, and a candle burning in it, and in the other hand four candles not lighted. He desired the parishioners to stay a while, saying he had a message from God unto them, and thereupon offered to go into the pulpit. But the people refusing to give him leave so to do, or to stay in the church, he went into the churchyard, and there told them that he had a vision, wherein he had received a command from God to deliver his will unto them, which he was to deliver and they to receive upon pain of damnation; consisting of five lights. 1. “That the Sabbath was abolished, as unnecessary, Jewish, and merely ceremonial. And here

(quoth he) I should put out the first light, but the wind is so high I cannot kindle it. 2. That tithes are abolished, as Jewish and ceremonial, a great burden to the saints of God, and a discouragement of industry and tillage. And here I should put out my second light, etc. 3. That ministers are abolished, as anti-Christian, and of no longer use, now Christ himself descends into the hearts of his saints, and his spirit enlighteneth them with revelations and inspirations. And here I should put out my third light, etc. 4. Magistrates are abolished, as useless, now that Christ himself is in purity amongst us, and hath erected the kingdom of the saints upon earth. Besides they are tyrants, and oppressors of the liberty of the saints, and tie them to laws and ordinances, mere human inventions.

And here I should put out my fourth light, etc. 5. Then putting his hand into his pocket, and pulling out a little Bible, he showed it open to the people, saying, Here is a book you have in great veneration, consisting of two parts, the Old and New Testament. I must tell you it is abolished. It containeth beggarly rudiments, milk for babes. But now Christ is in glory amongst us, and imparts a further measure of his spirit to his saints than this can afford. I am commanded to burn it before your face. Then putting out the candle, he said, And here my fifth light is extinguished.” It became a pretty common doctrine at that time, that it was unworthy of a Christian man to pay rent to his fellow-creatures; and landlords were obliged to use all the penalties of law against their tenants, whose conscience was scrupulous.]






24 (return) [ NOTE X, p. 424. When the earl of Derby was alive, he had been summoned by Ireton to surrender the Isle of Man; and he returned this spirited and memorable answer:

“I received your letter with indignation, and with scorn return you this answer; that I cannot but wonder whence you should gather any hopes that I should prove, like you, treacherous to my sovereign; since you cannot be ignorant of my former actions in his late majesty’s service, from which principles of loyalty I am no whit departed. I scorn your proffers; I disdain your favor; I abhor your treason; and am so far from delivering up this island to your advantage, that I shall keep it to the utmost of my power to your destruction. Take this for your final answer, and forbear any farther solicitations; for if you trouble me with any more messages of this nature, I will burn the paper and hang up the bearer. This is the immutable resolution, and shall be the undoubted practice of him who accounts it his chiefest glory to be his majesty’s most loyal and obedient subject,



“DERBY.”]



25 (return) [ NOTE Y, p. 426. It had been a usual policy of the Presbyterian ecclesiastics to settle a chaplain in the great families, who acted as a spy upon his master, and gave them intelligence of the most private transactions and discourses of the family; a signal instance of priestly tyranny, and the subjection of the nobility! They even obliged the servants to give intelligence against their masters. Whitlocke, p. 502. The same author (p. 512) tells the following story: The synod meeting at Perth, and citing the ministers and people who had expressed a dislike of their heavenly government, the men being out of the way, their wives resolved to answer for them. And on the day of appearance, one hundred and twenty women, with good clubs in their hands, came and besieged the church where the reverend ministers sat. They sent one of their number to treat with the females; and he, threatening excommunication, they basted him for his labor, kept him prisoner, and sent a party of sixty, who routed the rest of the clergy, bruised their bodies sorely, took all their baggage and twelve horses. One of the ministers, after a mile’s running, taking all creatures for his foes, meeting with a soldier, fell on his knees, who, knowing nothing of the matter, asked the blackcoat what he meant. The female conquerors, having laid hold on the synod clerk, beat him till he forswore his office.

Thirteen ministers rallied about four miles from the place, and voted that this village should never more have a synod in it, but be accursed; and that though in the years 1638, and 1639, the godly women were cried up for stoning the bishops, yet now the whole sex should be esteemed wicked.]






26 (return) [ NOTE Z, p. 468. About this time an accident had almost robbed the protector of his life, and saved his enemies the trouble of all their machinations. Having got six fine Friesland coach horses, as a present from the count of Oldenburgh, he undertook for his amusement to drive them about Hyde Park, his secretary, Thurloe, being in the coach. The horses were startled and ran away. He was unable to command them or keep the box. He fell upon the pole, was dragged upon the ground for some time. A pistol, which he carried in his pocket, went off and by that singular good fortune which ever attended him, he was taken up without any considerable hurt or bruise.]






27 (return) [ NOTE AA, p. 512. After Monk’s declaration for a free parliament on the eleventh of February, he could mean nothing but the king’s restoration; yet it was long before he would open himself even to the king. This declaration was within eight days after his arrival in London. Had he ever intended to have set up for himself, he would not surely have so soon abandoned a project so inviting; he would have taken some steps which would have betrayed it. It could only have been some disappointment, some frustrated attempt, which could have made him renounce the road of private ambition. But there is not the least symptom of such intentions. The story told of Sir Anthony Ashley Cooper, by Mr. Locke, has not any appearance of truth. See Lord Linsdowne’s Vindication, and Philips’s Continuation of Baker. I shall add to what those authors have advanced, that Cardinal Mazarine wished for the king’s restoration; though he would not have ventured much to have procured it.]



END OF VOL. V.
