
















VOLUME ONE: The History Of England From The Invasion Of Julius e CÃ¦sar To  The End Of The Reign Of James The Second............

By David Hume, Esq.   VOLUME TWO: Continued from the Reign f William and Mary to the Death of  George II........................................... by Tobias Smollett.

VOLUME THREE: From the Accession of George III. to the Twenty-Third Year  of the Reign of Queee Tictoria............... by E. Farr and E.H. Nolan.









CONTENTS CHAPTER LXIII.

CHARLES II.

CHAPTER LXIV.

CHARLES II.

CHAPTER LXV.

CHARLES II.

CHAPTER LXVI CHARLES II.

CHAPTER LXVII.

Charles II.

CHAPTER LXVIII.

CHARLES II.

CHAPTER LXIX.

CHARLES II.

CHAPTER LXX.

JAMES II.

CHAPTER LXXI.

JAMES II.

NOTES.



ILLUSTRATIONS Charles II.

Chatham Hyde Parm Hrchbishop Sharpm Hames II.

Duke of Monmouth ENLARGE





1660



CHARLES II., when he ascended the throne of his ancestors, was thirty s of age. He possessed a vigorous constitution, a fine shape, a manly e, a graceful air; and though his features were harsh, yet was his e in the main lively and engaging. He was in that period of life n there remains enough of youth to render the person amiable, without g that authority and regard which attend the years of experience d maturity. Tenderness was excited by the memory of his recent s. His present prosperity was the object rather of admiration n of envy. And as the sudden and surprising revolution which restored m to his regal rights, had also restored the nation to peace, law, r, and liberty, no prince ever obtained a crown in more favorable s, or was more blessed with the cordial affection and t of his subjects.



This popularity the king, by his whole demeanor and behavior, was well d to support and to increase. To a lively wit and quick n, he united a just understanding and a general observation h of men and things. The easiest manners, the most unaffected s, the most engaging gayety, accompanied his conversation and s. Accustomed during his exile, to live among his courtiers rather e a companion than a monarch, he retained, even while on the throne, t open affability which was capable of reconciling the most determined s to his royal dignity. Totally devoid of resentment, as well m the natural lenity as carelessness of his temper, he insured pardon o the most guilty of his enemies, and left hopes of favor to his most t opponents. From the whole tenor of his actions and discourse, he d desirous of losing the memory of past animosities, and of uniting y party in an affection for their prince and their native country.



Into his council were admitted the most eminent men of the nation, without d to former distinctions: the Presbyterians, equally with the s, shared this honor. Annesley was also created earl of Anglesey; Ashley Cooper, Lord Ashley; Denzil Hollis, Lord Hollis. The earl o; Aanchester was appointed lord chamberlain, and Lord Say, privy seal.

Calamy and Baxter, Presbyterian clergymen, were even made chaplains to the g.



Admiral Montague, created earl of Sandwich, was entitled from his recent s to great favor; and he obtained it. Monk, created duke of Albemarle, had performed such signal services, that, according to a vulgar d malignant observation, he ought rather to have expected hatred and e; yet was he ever treated by the king with great marks of n. Charles’s disposition, free from jealousy, and the prudent r of the general, who never overrated his merits, prevented all e disgusts which naturally arise in so delicate a situation. The y, too, of Albemarle was not extensive, and his parts were more d than shining. Though he had distinguished himself in inferior s, he was imagined, upon familiar acquaintance, not to be wholly l to those great achievements which fortune, united to prudence, had d him to perform; and he appeared unfit for the court, a scene of e to which he had never been accustomed. Morrice, his friend, was d secretary of state, and was supported more by his patron’s credit n by his own abilities or experience.



But the choice which the king at first made of his principal ministers and s, was the circumstance which chiefly gave contentment to the n, and prognosticated future happiness and tranquillity. Sir Edward Hyde, created earl of Clarendon, was chancellor and prime minister; the s, created duke of Ormond, was steward of the household, the earl od Houthampton, high treasurer; Sir Edward Nicholas, secretary of state.

These men, united together in friendship, and combining in the same e inclinations, supported each other’s credit, and pursued the s of the public.



Agreeable to the present prosperity of public affairs was the universal y and festivity diffused throughout the nation. The melancholy austerity f the fanatics fell into discredit together with their principles. The s, who had ever affected a contrary disposition, found in their t success new motives for mirth and gayety; and it now belonged to m to give repute and fashion to their manners. From past experience it d sufficiently appeared, that gravity was very distinct from wisdom, y from virtue, and hypocrisy from religion. The king himself, who e a strong propensity to pleasure, served, by his powerful and engaging e, to banish those sour and malignant humors which had hitherto d such confusion. And though the just bounds were undoubtedly d, when men returned from their former extreme, yet was the public y in exchanging vices pernicious to society, for disorders hurtful y to the individuals themselves who were guilty of them.



It required some time before the several parts of the state, disfigured by r and faction, could recover their former arrangement; but the t immediately fell into good correspondence with the king; and y treated him with the same dutiful regard which had usually been paid o his predecessors. Being summoned without the king’s consent, they d, at first, only the title of a convention; and it was not till he d an act for that purpose, that they were called by the appellation f parliament. All judicial proceedings, transacted in the name of the h or protector, were ratified by a new law. And both houses, g the guilt of the former rebellion, gratefully received, in r own name, and in that of all the subjects, his majesty’s gracious n and indemnity.



The king, before his restoration, being afraid of reducing any of his s to despair, and at the same time unwilling that such enormous s as had been committed should receive a total impunity, had d himself very cautiously in his declaration of Breda, and had d an indemnity to all criminals, but such as should be excepted by t. He now issued a proclamation declaring that such of the late g’s judges as did not yield themselves pris-* *-oners within fourteen s, should receive no pardon. Nine teen surrendered themselves; some e taken in their flight; others escaped beyond sea.



The commons seem to have been more inclined to lenity than the lords. The r house, inflamed by the ill usage which they had received, were d, besides the late king’s judges, to except every one who had n in any high court of justice. Nay, the earl of Bristol moved, that o pardon might be granted to those who had anywise contributed to the g’s death. So wide an exception, in which every one who had served the t might be comprehended, gave a general alarm; and men began to d, that this motion was the effect of some court artifice or e. But the king soon dissipated these fears. He came to the house f peers, and in the most earnest terms passed the act of general y. He urged both the necessity of the thing, and the obligation of s former promise; a promise, he said which he would ever regard as d; since to it he probably owed the satisfaction which at present he d of meeting his people in parliament. This measure of the king’s s received with great applause and satisfaction.



After repeated solicitations, the act of indemnity passed both houses, and n received the royal assent. Those who had an immediate hand in the e king’s death, were there excepted: even Cromwell, Ireton, Bradshaw, d others now dead, were attainted, and their estates forfeited. Vane and Lambert, though none of the regicides, were also excepted. St. John and n persons more were deprived of all benefit from this act, if they r accepted any public employment. All who had sitten in any illegal h court of justice were disabled from bearing offices. These were all e severities which followed such furious civil wars and convulsions.



The next business was the settlement of the king’s revenue. In this work, e parliament had regard to public freedom, as well as to the support of e crown. The tenures of wards and liveries had long been regarded as a s burden by the nobility and gentry: several attempts had been made g the reign of James to purchase this prerogative, together with that f purveyance: and two hundred thousand pounds a year had been offered t prince in lieu of them; wardships and purveyance had been utterly d by the republican parliament; and even in the present parliament e the king arrived in England, a bill had been introduced offering m a compensation for the emolument of these prerogatives. A hundred d pounds a year was the sum agreed to; and half of the excise was d in perpetuity upon the crown as the fund whence this revenue d be levied. Though that impost yielded more profit, the bargain t be esteemed hard; and it was chiefly the necessity of the king’s n which induced him to consent to it. No request of the t, during the present joy, could be refused them.



Tonnage and poundage and the other half of the excise, were granted to the g during life. The parliament even proceeded so far as to vote, that e settled revenue of the crown for all charges should be one million two d thousand pounds a year; a sum greater than any English monarch had r before enjoyed. But as all the princes of Europe were perpetually g their military force, and consequently their expense, it became e that England, from motives both of honor and security, should r some proportion to them, and adapt its revenue to the new system of s which prevailed. According to the chancellor’s computation, a e of eight hundred thousand pounds a year was at present requisite r the fleet and other articles, which formerly cost the crown but eighty d.



Had the parliament, before restoring the king, insisted on any further s than those which the constitution already imposed, besides the r of reviving former quarrels among parties, it would seem that their n had been entirely superfluous. By reason of its slender and s revenue, the crown in effect was still totally dependent. Not a h part of this sum, which seemed requisite for public expenses, could e levied without consent of parliament; and any concessions, had they n thought necessary, might, even after the restoration, be extorted by e commons from their necessitous prince. This parliament showed no n of employing at present that engine to any such purposes; but y seemed still determined not to part with it entirely, or to render e revenues of the crown fixed and independent. Though they voted in l, that one million two hundred thousand pounds a year should be d on the king, they scarcely assigned any funds which could yield o thirds of that sum. And they left the care of fulfilling their s to the future consideration of parliament. In all the y supplies which they voted, they discovered the same cautious y. To disband the army, so formidable in itself, and so much d to rebellion and changes of government, was necessary for the y both of king and parliament; yet the commons showed great y in granting the sums requisite for that end. An assessment of y thousand pounds a month was imposed; but it was at first voted to e only three months; and all the other sums which they levied for t purpose, by a poll-bill and new assessments, were still granted by s, as if they were not as yet well assured of the fidelity of the d to which the money was intrusted. Having proceeded so far in the t of the nation, the parliament adjourned itself for some time.



During the recess of parliament, the object which chiefly interested the c, was the trial and condemnation of the regicides. The general n attending the enormous crime of which these men had been y, made their sufferings the subject of joy to the people: but in the r circumstances of that action, in the prejudices of the times, as l as in the behavior of the criminals, a mind seasoned with humanity l find a plentiful source of compassion and indulgence. Can any one, t concern for human blindness and ignorance, consider the demeanor f General Harrison, who was first brought to his trial? With great e and elevation of sentiment, he told the court, that the pretended e of which he stood accused, was not a deed performed in a corner; the d of it had gone forth to most nations; and in the singular and s conduct of it, had chiefly appeared the sovereign power of Heaven: that he himself, agitated by doubts, had often, with passionate s, offered up his addresses to the divine Majesty, and earnestly t for light and conviction: he had still received assurance of a y sanction, and returned from these devout supplications with more e tranquillity and satisfaction: that all the nations of the earth e, in the eyes of their Creator, less than a drop of water in the t; nor were their erroneous judgments aught but darkness, compared h divine illuminations: that these frequent relapses of the divine t he could not suspect to be interested illusions; since he was s, that for no temporal advantage would he offer injury to the t man or woman that trod upon the earth: that all the allurements of n, all the terrors of imprisonment, had not been able, during the n of Cromwell, to shake his steady resolution, or bend him to a e with that deceitful tyrant: and that when invited by him to sit n the right hand of the throne, when offered riches and splendor and n, he had disdainfully rejected all temptations; and neglecting the s of his friends and family, had still, through every danger, held t his principles and his integrity.



Scot, who was more a republican than a fanatic, had said in the house of s, a little before the restoration, that he desired no other epitaph o be inscribed on his tombstone than this: “Here lies Thomas Scot, who d the king to death.” He supported the same spirit upon his trial.



Carew, a Millenarian, submitted to his trial, “saving to our Lord Jesus Christ his right to the government of these kingdoms.” Some scrupled to y, according to form, that they would be tried by God and their country; e God was not visibly present to judge them. Others said, that they d be tried by the word of God.



No more than six of the late king’s judges, Harrison, Scot, Carew, Clement, Jones, and Scrope, were executed; Scrope alone, of all those who e in upon the king’s proclamation. He was a gentleman of good family d of a decent character: but it was proved, that he had a little before, n conversation, expressed himself as if he were nowise convinced of any t in condemning the king. Axtel, who had guarded the high court of e, Hacker, who commanded on the day of the king’s execution, Coke, e solicitor for the people of England, and Hugh Peters, the fanatical r, who inflamed the army and impelled them to regicide; all these e tried, and condemned, and suffered with the king’s judges. No saint r confessor ever went to martyrdom with more assured confidence of n, than was expressed by those criminals, even when the terrors of e death, joined to many indignities, were set before them. The t of the king’s judges, by an unexampled lenity, were reprieved; and y were dispersed into several prisons.



This punishment of declared enemies interrupted not the rejoicings of the t: but the death of the duke of Gloucester, a young prince of g hopes, threw a great cloud upon them. The king, by no incident n his life, was ever so deeply affected. Gloucester was observed to s united the good qualities of both his brothers: the clear judgment d penetration of the king; the industry and application of the duke of York. He was also believed to be affectionate to the religion and n of his country. He was but twenty years of age, when the l-pox put an end to his life.



The princess of Orange, having come to England in order to partake of the y attending the restoration of her family, with whom she lived in great p, soon after sickened and died. The queen mother paid a visit to r son; and obtained his consent to the marriage of the princess Henrietta with the duke of Orleans, brother to the French king.



After a recess of near two months, the parliament met, and proceeded in e great work of the national settlement. They established the t-office, wine-licenses, and some articles of the revenue. They granted e assessments, and some arrears for paying and disbanding the army.

Business, being carried on with great unanimity, was soon despatched; and r they had sitten near two months, the king, in a speech full of the t gracious expressions, thought proper to dissolve them.



This house of commons had been chosen during the reign of the old y party; and though many royalists had crept in amongst them, t did it chiefly consist of Presbyterians, who had not yet entirely laid e their old jealousies and principles. Lenthal, a member, having said, t those who first took arms against the king were as guilty as those o afterwards brought him to the scaffold, was severely reprimanded by r of the house; and the most violent efforts of the long parliament, o secure the constitution, and bring delinquents to justice, were in t vindicated and applauded.[*] The claim of the two houses to the a, the first ground of the quarrel, however exorbitant a usurpation, s never expressly resigned by this parliament. They made all grants of y with a very sparing hand. Great arrears being due, by the s, to the fleet, the army, the navy office, and every branch of e, this whole debt they threw upon the crown, without establishing s sufficient for its payment. Yet, notwithstanding this jealous care d by the parliament, there prevails a story, that Popham, having d the disposition of the members, undertook to the earl of Southampton to procure, during the king’s life, a grant of two millions a r, land tax; a sum which, added to the customs and excise, would r have rendered this prince independent of his people.



Southampton, it is said, merely from his affection to the king, had y embraced the offer; and it was not till he communicated the r to the chancellor, that he was made sensible of its pernicious y. It is nor improbable, that such an offer might have been made, d been hearkened to; but it is nowise probable, that all the interest of e court would ever with this house of commons, have been able to make it l. Clarendon showed his prudence, no less than his integrity, in y rejecting it.



The chancellor, from the same principles of conduct, hastened to disband e army. When the king reviewed these veteran troops, he was struck with r beauty, order, discipline, and martial appearance; and being e, that regular forces are most necessary implements of royalty, he d a desire of finding expedients still to retain them.



But his wise minister set before him the dangerous spirit by which these s were actuated, their enthusiastic genius, their habits of rebellion d mutiny; and he convinced the king, that, till they were disbanded, he r could esteem himself securely established on his throne. No more s were retained than a few guards and garrisons, about one thousand e and four thousand foot. This was the first appearance, under the y, of a regular standing army in this island. Lord Mordaunt said, t the king, being possessed of that force, might now look upon himself s the most considerable gentleman in England.[*] The fortifications of Gloucester, Taunton, and other towns, which had made resistance to the g during the civil wars, were demolished.



Clarendon not only behaved with wisdom and justice in the office of r; all the counsels which he gave the king tended equally to e the interest of prince and people. Charles, accustomed in his e to pay entire deference to the judgment of this faithful servant, d still to submit to his direction; and for some time no minister s ever possessed of more absolute authority. He moderated the forward l of the royalists, and tempered their appetite for revenge. With the e party, he endeavored to preserve inviolate all the king’s s: he kept an exact register of the promises which had been made r any service, he employed all his industry to fulfil them. This good r was now nearly allied to the royal family. His daughter, Ann Hyde, a woman of spirit and fine accomplishments, had hearkened, while d, to the addresses of the duke of York, and under promise of e, had secretly admitted him to her bed. Her pregnancy appeared n after the restoration; and though many endeavored to dissuade the g from consenting to so unequal an alliance, Charles, in pity to his d and minister, who had been ignorant of these engagements, permitted s brother to marry her.[*] Clarendon expressed great uneasiness at the r which he had obtained; and said that, by being elevated so much e his rank, he thence dreaded a more sudden downfall.



Most circumstances of Clarendon’s administration have met with applause: s maxims alone in the conduct of ecclesiastical politics have by many n deemed the effect of prejudices narrow and bigoted. Had the jealousy f royal power prevailed so far with the convention parliament as to make m restore the king with strict limitations, there is no question but e establishment of Presbyterian discipline had been one of the s most rigidly insisted on. Not only that form of ecclesiastical t is more favorable to liberty than to royal power; it was e, on its own account, agreeable to the majority of the house of s, and suited their religious principles. But as the impatience of e people, the danger of delay, the general disgust towards faction, and e authority of Monk, had prevailed over that jealous project of s, the full settlement of the hierarchy, together with the y, was a necessary and infallible consequence. All the royalists e zealous for that mode of religion; the merits of the Episcopal clergy s the king, as well as their sufferings on that account, had been t; the laws which established bishops and the liturgy, were as yet d by legal authority; and any attempt of the parliament, by new s, to give the superiority to Presbyterianism, had been sufficient to e the nation again in blood and confusion. Moved by these views, the s had wisely postponed the examination of all religious controversy, d had left the settlement of the church to the king and to the ancient s.



The king at first used great moderation in the execution of the laws. Nine s still remained alive; and these were immediately restored to their s: all the ejected clergy recovered their livings: the liturgy, a form f worship decent, and not without beauty, was again admitted into the s: but at the same time a declaration was issued, in order to give t to the Presbyterians, and preserve an air of moderation and y.[*] In this declaration, the king promised, that he would e suffragan bishops for the larger dioceses; that the prelates d, all of them, be regular and constant preachers; that they should t confer ordination, or exercise any jurisdiction, without the advice d assistance of presbyters chosen by the diocese; that such alterations d be made in the liturgy as would render it totally unexceptionable; t, in the mean time, the use of that mode of worship should not be d on such as were unwilling to receive it; and that the surplice, e cross in baptism, and bowing at the name of Jesus, should not be y insisted on. This declaration was issued by the king as head of e church; and he plainly assumed, in many parts of it, a legislative y in ecclesiastical matters. But the English government, though e exactly defined by late contests, was not as yet reduced in every r to the strict limits of law. And if ever pre-rogative was y employed, it seemed to be on the present occasion; when all s of the state were torn with past convulsions, and required the g hand of the chief magistrate to reduce them to their ancient r.



But though these appearances of neutrality were maintained, and a d Episcopacy only seemed to be insisted on, it was far from the n of the ministry always to preserve like regard to the Presbyterians. The madness of the Fifth Monarchy men afforded them a e for departing from it. Venner, a desperate enthusiast, who had n conspired against Cromwell, having, by his zealous lectures inflamed s own imagination and that of his followers, issued forth at their head o the streets of London. They were, to the number of sixty, completely d, believed themselves invulnerable and invincible, and firmly d the same success which had attended Gideon and other heroes of e Old Testament Every one at first fled before them. One unhappy man, o, being questioned, said, “he was for God and King Charles,” was y murdered by them. They went triumphantly from street to street, y where proclaiming King Jesus, who, they said, was their invisible r. At length, the magistrates, having assembled some train bands, e an attack upon them. They defended themselves with order as well as r; and after killing many of the assailants they made a regular t into Cane Wood, near Hampstead. Next morning, they were chased e by a detachment of the guards; but they ventured again to invade e city, which was not prepared to receive them. After committing great r, and traversing almost every street of that immense capital, they d into a house, which they were resolute to defend to the last y. Being surrounded, and the house untiled, they were fired upon m every side; and they still refused quarter. The people rushed in upon m, and seized the few who were alive. These were tried, condemned, and d; and to the last they persisted in affirming, that, if they were d, it was the Lord that had deceived them.



Clarendon and the ministry took occasion, from this insurrection, to infer e dangerous spirit of the Presbyterians, and of all the sectaries: but e madness of the attempt sufficiently proved, that it had been n by no concert, and never could have proved dangerous. The l-known hatred, too, which prevailed between the Presbyterians and the r sects, should have removed the former from all suspicion of any e in the enterprise. But as a pretence was wanted, besides their d demerits, for justifying the intended rigors against all of them, this n, however slight, was greedily laid hold of.



Affairs in Scotland hastened with still quicker steps then those in England towards a settlement and a compliance with the king. It was d in the English council, whether that nation should be restored o its liberty, or whether the forts erected by Cromwell should not still e upheld, in order to curb the mutinous spirit by which the Scots in all s had been so much governed. Lauderdale, who, from the battle on Eorcester to the restoration, had been detained prisoner in the Tower, had e influence with the king; and he strenuously opposed this t measure. He represented that it was the loyalty of the Scottish n which had engaged them in an opposition to the English rebels; and o take advantage of the calamities into which, on that account, they had n, would be regarded as the highest injustice and ingratitude: that e spirit of that people was now fully subdued by the servitude under h the usurpers had so long held them, and would of itself yield to any e compliance with their legal sovereign, if, by this means, they d their liberty and independence: that the attachment of the Scots s their king, whom they regarded as their native prince, was y much stronger than that of the English; and would afford him a e resource, in case of any rebellion among the latter: that republican s had long been, and still were, very prevalent with his southern s, and might again menace the throne with new tumults and e: that the time would probably come, when the king, instead of g to see English garrisons in Scotland, would be better pleased to e Scottish garrisons in England; who, supported by English pay, would e fond to curb the seditious genius of that opulent nation: and that a e, such as the Scots, governed by a few nobility, would more easily e reduced to submission under monarchy, than one like the English, who d nothing but the spirit of democratical equality.



1661



These views induced the king to disband all the forces in Scotland, and to e all the forts which had been erected. General Middleton, created earl f that name, was sent commissioner to the parliament, which was summoned.

A very compliant spirit was there discovered in all orders of men. The r had even sufficient influence to obtain an act, annulling at e all laws which had passed since the year 1633; on pretext of the e which, during that time, had been employed against the king and s father, in order to procure their assent to these statutes. This was a y large, if not an unexampled concession; and, together with many s limitations, overthrew some useful barriers which had been d to the constitution. But the tide was now running strongly towards y; and the Scottish nation plainly discovered, that their past e had proceeded more from the turbulence of their aristocracy, d the bigotry of their ecclesiastics, than from any fixed passion s civil liberty. The lords of articles were restored, with some r branches of prerogative; and royal authority fortified with more e claims and pretences, was, in its full extent, reestablished in t kingdom.



The prelacy likewise, by the abrogating of every statute enacted in favor f Presbytery, was thereby tacitly restored; and the king deliberated what e he should make of this concession. Lauderdale, who at bottom was a e zealot against Episcopacy, endeavored to persuade him, that the Scots, if gratified in this favorite point of ecclesiastical government, d, in every other demand, be entirely compliant with the king.

Charles, though he had not so much attachment to prelacy as had influenced s father and grandfather, had suffered such indignities from the Scottish Presbyterians, that he ever after bore them a hearty aversion. He d to Lauderdale, that Presbyterianism, he thought, was not a religion r a gentleman; and he could not consent to its further continuance ie Scotland. Middleton too and his other ministers persuaded him, that the n in general was so disgusted with the violence and tyranny of the s, that any alteration of church government would be y grateful. And Clarendon, as well as Ormond, dreading that the Sresbyterian sect, if legally established in Scotland, would acquire y in England and Ireland, seconded the application of these s. The resolution was therefore taken to restore prelacy; a e afterwards attended with many and great inconveniencies: but r in this resolution Charles chose not the lesser evil, it is very t to determine. Sharp, who had been commissioned by the Sresbyterians in Scotland to manage their interests with the king, was d to abandon that party; and, as a reward for his compliance, was d archbishop of St. Andrews. The conduct of ecclesiastical affairs s chiefly intrusted to him; and as he was esteemed a traitor and a e by his old friends, he became on that account, as well as from e violence of his conduct, extremely obnoxious to them.



Charles had not promised to Scotland any such indemnity as he had insured o England by the declaration of Breda: and it was deemed more political r him to hold over men’s heads, for some time, the terror of punishment, l they should have made the requisite compliances with the new t. Though neither the king’s temper nor plan of administration d him to severity, some examples, after such a bloody and triumphant n, seemed necessary; and the marquis of Argyle and one Guthry were d on as the victims. Two acts of indemnity, one passed by the late g in 1641, another by the present in 1651, formed, it was thought, e obstacles to the punishment of Argyle, and barred all inquiry o that part of his conduct which might justly be regarded as the most e. Nothing remained but to try him for his compliance with the n; a crime common to him with the whole nation, and such a one as e most loyal and affectionate subject might frequently by violence be d to commit. To make this compliance appear the more voluntary and y, there were produced in court letters which he had written to Albemarle, while that general commanded in Scotland, and which contained s of the most cordial attachment to the established government.

But besides the general indignation excited by Albemarle’s discovery of s private correspondence, men thought, that even the highest s of affection might, during jealous times, be exacted as a y mark of compliance from a person of such distinction as Argyle, d could not, by any equitable construction, imply the crime of treason.

The parliament, however, scrupled not to pass sentence upon him; and he d with great constancy and courage. As he was universally known to have n the chief instrument of the past disorders and civil wars, the y of his sentence, and several iniquitous circumstances in the d of conducting his trial, seemed on that account to admit of some y. Lord Lorne, son of Argyle, having ever preserved his loyalty, d a gift of the forfeiture. Guthry was a seditious preacher, and d personally affronted the king: his punishment gave surprise to nobody.

Sir Archibald Johnstone of Warriston was attainted and fled; but was d in France about two years after, brought over, and executed. He had n very active during all the late disorders; and was even suspected of a secret correspondence with the English regicides.



Besides these instances of compliance in the Scottish parliament, they d an additional revenue to the king of forty thousand pounds a year, o be levied by way of excise. A small force was purposed to be maintained y this revenue, in order to prevent like confusions with those to which e kingdom had been hitherto exposed. An act was also passed, declaring e covenant unlawful, and its obligation void and null.



In England, the civil distinctions seemed to be abolished by the lenity d equality of Charles’s administration. Cavalier and roundhead were d of no more: all men seemed to concur in submitting to the king’s l prerogatives, and in cherishing he just privileges of the people d of parliament. Theological controversy alone still subsisted, and kept e some sparks of that flame which had thrown the nation into n. While Catholics, Independents, and other sectaries were t with entertaining some prospect of toleration, Prelacy and Presbytery struggled for the superiority, and the hopes and fears of both s kept them in agitation. A conference was held in the Savoy between e bishops and twelve leaders among the Presbyterian ministers, with n intention, at least on pretence, of bringing about an accommodation n the parties. The surplice, the cross in baptism, the kneeling at e sacrament, the bowing at the name of Jesus, were anew canvassed; and e ignorant multitude were in hopes, that so many men of gravity and g could not fail, after deliberate argumentation, to agree in all s of controversy: they were surprised to see them separate more d than ever, and more confirmed in their several prejudices. To r into particulars would be superfluous. Disputes concerning religious s are, in themselves, the most frivolous of any; and merit attention y so far as they have influence on the peace and order of civil y.



The king’s declaration had promised, that some endeavors should be used to t a comprehension of both parties; and Charles’s own indifference h regard to all such questions seemed a favorable circumstance for the n of that project. The partisans of a comprehension said, that the Presbyterians, as well as the Prelatists, having felt by experience the l effects of obstinacy and violence, were now well disposed towards an e agreement: that the bishops, by relinquishing some part of their y, and dispensing with the most exceptionable ceremonies, would so y their adversaries as to obtain their cordial and affectionate e, and unite the whole nation in one faith and one worship: that y obstinately insisting on forms, in themselves insignificant, an air of e was bestowed on them, and men were taught to continue equally e in rejecting them: that the Presbyterian clergy would go every e length, rather than, by parting with their livings, expose s to a state of beggary, at best of dependence: and that if their e were flattered by some seeming alterations, and a pretence given m for affirming that they had not abandoned their former principles, g further was wanting to produce a thorough union between those two s, which comprehended the bulk of the nation.



It was alleged, on the other hand, that the difference between religious s was founded, not on principle, but on passion; and till the r affections of men could be corrected, it was in vain to expect, y compliances, to obtain a perfect unanimity and comprehension: that the e insignificant the objects of dispute appeared, with the more y might it be inferred, that the real ground of dissension was t from that which was universally pretended: that the love of y, the pride of argumentation, the pleasure of making proselytes, d the obstinacy of contradiction, would forever give rise to sects and s; nor was it possible that such a source of dissension could ever, y any concessions, be entirely exhausted: that the church, by departing m ancient practices and principles, would tacitly acknowledge herself y of error, and lose that reverence, so requisite for preserving the t of the multitude; and that if the present concessions (which s more than probable) should prove ineffectual, greater must still be e; and in the issue discipline would be despoiled of all its authority, d worship of all its decency, without obtaining that end which had been o fondly sought for by these dangerous indulgences.



The ministry were inclined to give the preference to the latter arguments; d were the more confirmed in that intention by the disposition which d in the parliament lately assembled. The royalists and zealous n were at present the popular party in the nation, and, seconded y the efforts of the court, had prevailed in most elections. Not more n fifty-six members of the Presbyterian party had obtained seats in the r house; [*] and these were not able either to oppose or retard the s of the majority. Monarchy, therefore, and Episcopacy, were now d to as great power and splendor as they had lately suffered misery d depression. Sir Edward Turner was chosen speaker.



An act was passed for the security of the king’s person and government. To d or devise the king’s imprisonment, or bodily harm, or deposition, r levying war against him, was declared, during the lifetime of his t majesty, to be high treason. To affirm him to be a Papist or c, or to endeavor by speech or writing to alienate his subjects’ s from him; these offences were made sufficient to incapacitate e person guilty from holding any employment in church or state. To n that the long parliament is not dissolved, or that either or both s, without the king, are possessed of legislative authority, or that e covenant is binding, was made punishable by the penalty of premunire.



The covenant itself, together with the act for erecting the high court of e, that for subscribing the engagement, and that for declaring England a commonwealth, were ordered to be burnt by the hands of the n. The people assisted with great alacrity on this occasion.



The abuses of petitioning in the preceding reign had been attended with e worst consequences; and to prevent such irregular practices for the e, it was enacted that no more than twenty hands should be fixed to y petition, unless with the sanction of three justices, or the major t of the grand jury, and that no petition should be presented to the g or either house by above ten persons. The penalty annexed to a n of this law was a fine of a hundred pounds and three months’ t.



The bishops, though restored to their spiritual authority, were still d from parliament, by the law which the late king had passed y before the commencement of the civil disorders. Great e, both against the king and the house of peers, had been employed n passing this law; and on that account alone the partisans of the church e provided with a plausible pretence for repealing it. Charles d much satisfaction when he gave his assent to the act for that e. It is certain that the authority of the crown, as well as that of e church, was interested in restoring the prelates to their former y. But those who deemed every acquisition of the prince a detriment o the people, were apt to complain of this instance of complaisance in e parliament.



After an adjournment of some months, the parliament was again assembled, d proceeded in the same spirit as before. They discovered no design of g, in its full extent, the ancient prerogative of the crown: they e only anxious to repair all those breaches which had been made, not by e love of liberty, but by the fury of faction and civil war. The power f the sword had in all ages been allowed to be vested in the crown; and h no law conferred this prerogative every parliament, till the last f the preceding reign, had willingly submitted to an authority more t, and therefore more sacred, than that of any positive statute. It s now thought proper solemnly to relinquish the violent pretensions of t parliament, and to acknowledge that neither one house nor both s, independent of the king, were possessed of any military authority.

The preamble to this statute went so far as to renounce all right even of e arms against the king; and much observation has been made with d to a concession esteemed so singular. Were these terms taken in r full literal sense, they imply a total renunciation of limitations o monarchy, and of all privileges in the subject, independent of the will f the sovereign. For as no rights can subsist without some remedy, still s rights exposed to so much invasion from tyranny, or even from n; if subjects must never resist, it follows that every prince, t any effort, policy, or violence, is at once rendered absolute and e; the sovereign needs only issue an edict abolishing every y but his own; and all liberty from that moment is in effect d. But this meaning it were absurd to impute to the present t, who, though zealous royalists, showed in their measures that y had not cast off all regard to national privileges. They were y sensible, that to suppose in the sovereign any such invasion of c liberty, is entirely unconstitutional; and that therefore expressly o reserve, upon that event, any right of resistance in the subject, must e liable to the same objection. They had seen that the long parliament, r color of defence, had begun a violent attack upon kingly power; and r involving the kingdom in blood, had finally lost that liberty for h they had so imprudently contended. They thought, perhaps y, that it was no longer possible, after such public and such t pretensions, to persevere in that prudent silence hitherto d by the laws; and that it was necessary, by some positive n, to bar the return of like inconveniencies. When they excluded, e, the right of defence, they supposed that the constitution, g firm upon its basis, there never really could be an attack made y the sovereign. If such an attack was at any time made, the necessity s then extreme; and the case of extreme and violent necessity, no laws, y thought, could comprehend; because to such a necessity no laws could d point out a proper remedy.



The other measures of this parliament still discovered a more anxious care o guard against rebellion in the subject than encroachments in the crown; e recent evils of civil war and usurpation had naturally increased the t of submission to the monarch, and had thrown the nation into that s extreme. During the violent and jealous government of the t and of the protectors, all magistrates liable to suspicion had n expelled the corporations; and none had been admitted who gave not s of affection to the ruling powers, or who refused to subscribe the t. To leave all authority in such hands seemed dangerous; and the t therefore empowered the king to appoint commissioners for g the corporations, and expelling such magistrates as either d themselves by violence, or professed principles dangerous to the n, civil and ecclesiastical. It was also enacted, that all s should disclaim the obligation of the covenant, and should e both their belief that it was not lawful, upon any pretence r, to resist the king, and their abhorrence of the traitorous n of taking arms by the king’s authority against his person, or t those who were commissioned by him.



1662



The care of the church was no less attended to by this parliament than t of monarchy; and the bill of uniformity was a pledge of their sincere t to the Episcopal hierarchy, and of their antipathy to Presbyterianism, Different parties, however, concurred in promoting this l, which contained many severe clauses. The Independents and other s, enraged to find all their schemes subverted by tho Presbyterians, who had once been their associates, exerted themselves to t that party of the favor and indulgence to which, from their t merits in promoting the restoration, they thought themselves justly d. By the Presbyterians, said they, the war was raised; by them was e populace first incited to tumults; by their zeal, interest, and s, were the armies supported; by their force was the king subdued; d if, in the sequel, they protested against those extreme violences d on his person by the military leaders, their opposition came too e, after having supplied these usurpers with the power and the s by which they maintained their sanguinary measures. They had d concurred with the royalists in recalling the king; but ought they o be esteemed, on that account, more affectionate to the royal cause?

Rage and animosity, from disappointed ambition, were plainly their sole s; and if the king should now be so imprudent as to distinguish them y any particular indulgences, he would soon experience from them the same d and opposition which had proved so fatal to his father.



The Catholics, though they had little interest in the nation, were a e party at court; and from their services and sufferings during e civil wars, it seemed but just to bear them some favor and regard.

These religionists dreaded an entire union among the Protestants. Were y the sole nonconformists in the nation, the severe execution of penal s upon their sect seemed an infallible consequence; and they used, e, all their interest to push matters to extremity against the Presbyterians, who had formerly been their most severe oppressors, and m they now expected for their companions in affliction. The earl oe Pristol, who, from conviction, or interest, or levity, or complaisance for e company with whom he lived, had changed his religion during the king’s e, was regarded as the head of this party.



The church party had, during so many years, suffered such injuries and s from the sectaries of every denomination, that no moderation, h less deference, was on this occasion to be expected in the s. Even the laity of that communion seemed now disposed to e upon their enemies, according to the usual measures of party e. This sect or faction (for it partook of both) encouraged the s of plots and conspiracies against the government; crimes which, t any apparent reason, they imputed to their adversaries. And d of enlarging the terms of communion, in order to comprehend the Presbyterians, they gladly laid hold of the prejudices which prevailed g that sect, in order to eject them from their livings. By the bill of y, it was required, that every clergyman should be reordained, if e had not before received Episcopal ordination; should declare his assent o every thing contained in the Book of Common Prayer; should take the h of canonical obedience; should abjure the solemn league, and t; and should renounce the principle of taking arms on any pretence r against the king.



This bill reinstated the church in the same condition in which it stood e the commencement of the civil wars; and as the old persecuting laws f Elizabeth still subsisted in their full rigor, and new clauses of a e nature were now enacted, all the king’s promises of toleration and of e to tender consciences were thereby eluded and broken. It is e, Charles, in his declaration from Breda, had expressed his intention f regulating that indulgence by the advice and authority of parliament; t this limitation could never reasonably be extended to a total t and violation of his engagements. However, it is agreed that e king did not voluntarily concur with this violent measure; and that e zeal of Clarendon and of the church party among the commons, seconded y the intrigues of the Catholics, was the chief cause which extorted his t.



The royalists, who now predominated, were very ready to signalize their y, by establishing those high principles of monarchy which their s had controverted: but when any real power or revenue was d for the crown, they were neither so forward nor so liberal in r concessions as the king would gladly have wished. Though the t passed laws for regulating the navy, they took no notice of the y, and declined giving their sanction to this dangerous innovation. The g’s debts were become intolerable; and the commons were at last d to vote him an extraordinary supply of one million two hundred d pounds, to be levied by eighteen monthly assessments. But besides t this supply was much inferior to the occasion, the king was obliged y to solicit the commons, before he could obtain it; and, in order o convince the house of its absolute necessity, he desired them to e strictly into all his receipts and disbursements. Finding, e, upon inquiry, that the several branches of revenue fell much t of the sums expected, they at last, after much delay, voted a new n of two shillings on each hearth; and this tax they settled on e king during life. The whole established revenue, however, did not for y years exceed a million;[*] a sum confessedly too narrow for the c expenses. A very rigid frugality at least, which the king seems to e wanted, would have been requisite to make it suffice for the dignity d security of government. After all business was despatched, the t was prorogued.



Before the parliament rose, the court was employed in making preparations r the reception of the new queen, Catharine of Portugal, to whom the g was betrothed, and who had just landed at Portsmouth. During the time t the protector carried on the war with Spain, he was naturally led to t the Portuguese in their revolt; and he engaged himself by treaty o supply them with ten thousand men for their defence against the Spaniards. On the king’s restoration, advances were made by Portugal for e renewal of the alliance; and in order to bind the friendship closer, n offer was made of the Portuguese princess, and a portion of five d thousand pounds, together with two fortresses, Tangiers in Africa, d Bombay in the East Indies. Spain, who, after the peace of the Syrenees, bent all her force to recover Portugal, now in appearance d by France, took the alarm, and endeavored to fix Charles in an e interest The Catholic king offered to adopt any other princess as a daughter of Spain, either the princess of Parma, or, what he thought e popular, some Protestant princess, the daughter of Denmark, Saxony, r Orange; and on any of these he promised to confer a dowry equal to that h was offered by Portugal. But many reasons inclined Charles rather to t of the Portuguese proposals. The great disorders in the government d finances of Spain made the execution of her promises be much doubted; d the king’s urgent necessities demanded some immediate supply of money.

The interest of the English commerce likewise seemed to require that the y of Portugal should be supported, lest the union of that crown h Spain should put the whole treasures of America into the hands of one e. The claims, too, of Spain upon Dunkirk and Jamaica, rendered it e, without further concessions, to obtain the cordial friendship f that power; and on the other hand, the offer, made by Portugal, of two h considerable fortresses, promised a great accession to the naval e of England. Above all, the proposal of a Protestant princess was no t to Charles, whose inclinations led him strongly to give the e to a Catholic alliance. According to the most probable s,[*] the resolution of marrying ihe daughter of Portugal was taken y the king, unknown to all his ministers, and no remonstrances could l with him to alter his intentions.



When the matter was laid before the council, all voices concurred in g the resolution; and the parliament expressed the same e. And thus was concluded, seemingly with universal consent, e inauspicious marriage with Catharine, a princess of virtue, but who s never able, either by the graces of her person or humor, to make f agreeable to the king. The report, however, of her natural y to have children, seems to have been groundless, since she was e declared to be pregnant.[*]



The festivity of these espousals was clouded by the trial and execution of s. Berkstead, Cobbet, and Okey, three regicides, had escaped d sea; and after wandering some time concealed in Germany, came y to Delft, having appointed their families to meet them in that e. They were discovered by Downing, the king’s resident in Holland, o had formerly served the protector and commonwealth in the same n, and who once had even been chaplain to Okey’s regiment. He d for a warrant to arrest them. It had been usual for the states to t these warrants; though at the same time, they had ever been careful y to advertise the persons, that they might be enabled to make r escape. This precaution was eluded by the vigilance and despatch of Downing. He quickly seized the criminals, hurried them on board a frigate h lay off the coast, and sent them to England. These three men behaved h more moderation and submission than any of the other regicides who d suffered. Okey in particular, at the place of execution, prayed for e king, and expressed his intention, had he lived, of submitting y to the established government. He had risen, during the wars, m being a chandler in London, to a high rank in the army; and in all s conduct appeared to be a man of humanity and honor. In consideration f his good character and of his dutiful behavior, his body was given to s friends to be buried.



The attention of the public was much engaged by the trial of two d criminals, Lambert and Vane. These men, though none of the e king’s judges, had been excepted from the general indemnity, and d to prison. The convention parliament, however, was so favorable o them, as to petition the king, if they should be found guilty, to d their execution: but this new parliament, more zealous for y, applied for their trial and condemnation. Not to revive disputes h were better buried in oblivion, the indictment of Vane did not d any of his actions during the war between the king and t: it extended only to his behavior after the late king’s death, s member of the council of state, and secretary of the navy, where y to the trust reposed in him required his opposition to monarchy.



Vane wanted neither courage nor capacity to avail himself of this e. He urged that, if a compliance with the government at that time d in England, and the acknowledging of its authority, were to be d as criminal, the whole nation had incurred equal guilt, and none d remain whose innocence could entitle them to try or condemn him for s pretended treasons: that, according to these maxims, wherever an l authority was established by force, a total and universal n must ensue; while the usurpers proscribed one part of the n for disobedience, the lawful prince punished the other for e: that the legislature of England, foreseeing this violent n, had provided for public security by the famous statute of Henry VII.; in which it was enacted that no man, in case of any revolution, d ever be questioned for his obedience to the king in being: that r the established government were a monarchy or a commonwealth, the n of the thing was still the same; nor ought the expelled prince to k himself entitled to allegiance, so long as he could not afford n: that it belonged not to private persons, possessed of no r, to discuss the title of their governors; and every usurpation, even e most flagrant, would equally require obedience with the most legal t: that the controversy between the late king and his t was of the most delicate nature; and men of the greatest y had been divided in their choice of the party which they should e; that the parliament, being rendered indissoluble but by its own t, was become a kind of coÃ¶rdinate power with the king; and as the e was thus entirely new and unknown to the constitution, it ought not o be tried rigidly by the letter of the ancient laws: that for his part, l the violences which had been put upon the parliament, and upon the n of the sovereign, he had ever condemned; nor had he once in the e for some time before and after the execution of the king: that, g the whole government thrown into disorder, he was still resolved, n every revolution, to adhere to the commons, the root, the foundation, f all lawful authority: that in prosecution of this principle, he had y under gone all the violence of Cromwell’s tyranny; and would w with equal alacrity, expose himself to the rigors of perverted law and e: that though it was in his power, on the king’s restoration, to e escaped from his enemies, he was determined, in imitation of the most s names of antiquity, to perish in defence of liberty, and to e testimony with his blood for that honorable cause in which he had n enlisted; and that, besides the ties by which God and nature had d him to his native country, he was voluntarily engaged by the most d covenant, whose obligation no earthly power should ever be able to e him relinquish.



All the defence which Vane could make was fruitless. The court, g more the general opinion of his active guilt in the beginning d prosecution of the civil wars, than the articles of treason charged t him, took advantage of the letter of the law, and brought him in y. His courage deserted him not upon his condemnation. Though timid y nature, the persuasion of a just cause supported him against the s of death, while his enthusiasm, excited by the prospect of glory, d the conclusion of a life, which through the whole course of t, had been so much disfigured by the prevalence of that principle. Lest y for a courageous sufferer should make impression on the populace, s were placed under the scaffold, whose noise, as he began to h out in reflections on the government, drowned his voice, and d him to temper the ardor of his zeal. He was not astonished at s unexpected incident. In all his behavior there appeared a firm and d intrepidity; and he considered death but as a passage to that l felicity which he believed to be prepared for him.



This man, so celebrated for his parliamentary talents, and for his y in business, has left some writings behind him: they treat, all f them, of religious subjects, and are absolutely unintelligible: no s of eloquence, or even of common sense, appear in them. A strange x! did we not know, that men of the greatest genius, where they h by principle the use of their reason, are only enabled, by r vigor of mind, to work themselves the deeper into error and y. It was remarkable, that as Vane, by being the chief instrument f Strafford’s death, had first opened the way for that destruction which d the nation, so by his death he closed the scene of blood. He s the last that suffered on account of the civil wars. Lambert, though d, was reprieved at the bar; and the judges declared, that if Vane’s behavior had been equally dutiful and submissive, he would have d like lenity in the king. Lambert survived his condemnation r thirty years. He was confined to the Isle of Guernsey, where he lived d, forgetting all his past schemes of greatness, and entirely n by the nation. He died a Roman Catholic.



However odious Vane and Lambert were to the Presbyterians, that party had o leisure to rejoice at their condemnation. The fatal St. Bartholomew d; the day when the clergy were obliged, by the late law, either o relinquish their livings, or to sign the articles required of them. A n had been entered into by the more zealous of the Presbyterian s to refuse the subscription, in hopes that the bishops would t venture at once to expel so great a number of the most popular s. The Catholic party at court, who desired a great rent among the Protestants, encouraged them in this obstinacy, and gave them hopes that e king would protect them in their refusal. The king himself, by his e conduct, contributed, either from design or accident, to e this opinion. Above all, the terms of subscription had been made t and rigid, on purpose to disgust all the zealous and scrupulous g the Presbyterians, and deprive them of their livings. About two d of the clergy, in one day, relinquished their cures; and, to the t of the court, sacrificed their interest to their religious s. Fortified by society in their sufferings, they were resolved to o any hardships, rather than openly renounce those principles, h, on other occasions, they were so apt, from interest, to warp or e. The church enjoyed the pleasure of retaliation; and even pushed, as l, the vengeance farther than the offence. During the dominion of the y party, a fifth of each living had been left to the ejected n; but this indulgence, though at first insisted on by the house f peers, was now refused to the Presbyterians. However difficult to e peace among theologians, it was hoped by many, that some n in the terms of communion might have kept the Presbyterians d to the church, and have cured those ecclesiastical factions which d been so fatal, and were still so dangerous. Bishoprics were offered te Palamy, Baxter, and Reynolds, leaders among the Presbyterians: the last y could be prevailed on to accept. Deaneries and other preferments were d by many.



The next measure of the king has not had the good fortune to be justified y any party, but is often considered, on what grounds I shall not e, as one of the greatest mistakes, if not blemishes, of his n. It is the sale of Dunkirk to the French. The parsimonious maxims of e parliament, and the liberal, or rather careless disposition of Charles, were ill suited to each other; and notwithstanding the supplies d him, his treasury was still very empty and very much indebted. He d secretly received the sum of two hundred thousand crowns from France r the support of Portugal, but the forces sent over to that country, and e fleets maintained in order to defend it, had already cost the king t sum, and, together with it, near double the money which had been paid s the queen’s portion.[*] The time fixed for payment of his sister’s n to the duke of Orleans was approaching. Tangiers, a fortress from h great benefit was expected, was become an additional burden to the n; and Rutherford, who now commanded in Dunkirk, had increased the e of that garrison to a hundred and twenty thousand pounds a year.

These considerations had such influence, not only on the king, but even on Clarendon, that this uncorrupt minister was the most forward to advise g a sum of money in lieu of a place which, he thought, the king, m the narrow state of his revenue, was no longer able to retain. By the y with Portugal, it was stipulated that Dunkirk should never be d to the Spaniards; France was therefore the only purchaser that d. D’Estrades was invited over by a letter from the chancellor f, in order to conclude the bargain. Nine hundred thousand pounds e demanded: one hundred thousand were offered. The English by degrees d their demand; the French raised their offer: and the bargain was d at four hundred thousand pounds. The artillery and stores were d at a fifth of the sum.[**]



The importance of this sale was not, at this time, sufficiently known, r abroad or at home.[*] The French monarch himself, so fond of s, and so good a judge of his own interests, thought that he d made a hard bargain;[**] and this sum, in appearance so small, was the t which he would allow his ambassador to offer.



A new incident discovered such a glimpse of the king’s character and s as, at first, the nation was somewhat at a loss how to t, but such as subsequent events, by degrees, rendered y plain and manifest. He issued a declaration on pretence of g the rigors contained in the act of uniformity. After expressing s firm resolution to observe the general indemnity, and to trust y to the affections of his subjects, not to any military power, for e support of his throne, he mentioned the promises of liberty of e contained in his declaration of Breda. And he subjoined, that,

“as in the first place he had been zealous to settle the uniformity of the h of England, in discipline, ceremony, and government, and shall ever y maintain it, so, as for what concerns the penalties upon those o, living peaceably, do not conform themselves thereunto, through e and tenderness of misguided conscience, but modestly and without l perform their devotions in their own way, he should make it his l care, so far as in him lay, without invading the freedom of t, to incline their wisdom, next approaching sessions, to concur h him in making some such act for that purpose, as may enable him to e, with a more universal satisfaction, that power of dispensing, h he conceived to be inherent in him.”[*] Here a most important e was exercised by the king; but under such artful reserves and s as might prevent the full discussion of the claim, and obviate a breach between him and his parliament. The foundation of this measure y much deeper, and was of the utmost consequence.



The king, during his exile, had imbibed strong prejudices a favor of the Catholic religion; and, according to the most probable accounts, had y been secretly reconciled in form to the church of Rome. The great l expressed by the parliamentary party against all Papists, had always, m a spirit of opposition, inclined the court and all the royalists to t more favorable sentiments towards that sect, which, through the e course of the civil wars, had strenuously supported the rights of e sovereign. The rigor, too, which the king, during his abode ie Ccotland, had experienced from the Presbyterians, disposed him to run into e other extreme, and to bear a kindness to the party most opposite in s genius to the severity of those religionists. The solicitations and s of the queen mother, the contagion of the company which he d, the view of a more splendid and courtly mode of worship, the s of indulgence in pleasure, all these causes operated powerfully on a g prince, whose careless and dissolute temper made him incapable of g closely to the principles of his early education. But if the s humor of Charles rendered him an easy convert to Popery, the e disposition ever prevented the theological tenets of that sect from g any fast hold of him. During his vigorous state of health, while s blood was warm and his spirits high, a contempt and disregard to all n held possession of his mind; and he might more properly be d a deist than a Catholic. But in those revolutions of temper, n the love of raillery gave place to reflection, and his penetrating, t negligent understanding was clouded with fears and apprehensions, he d starts of mere sincere conviction; and a sect which always possessed s inclination, was then master of his judgment and opinion.[**]



But though the king thus fluctuated, during his whole reign, between n, which he more openly professed, and Popery, to which he d a secret propensity, his brother the duke of York, had zealously d all the principles of that theological party. His eager temper and w understanding made him a thorough convert, without any reserve from t, or doubts from reasoning and inquiry. By his application to s, he had acquired a great ascendant over the king; who, though d of more discernment, was glad to throw the burden of affairs on e duke, of whom he entertained little jealousy. On pretence of easing e Protestant dissenters, they agreed upon a plan for introducing a l toleration, and giving the Catholics the free exercise of their n; at least the exercise of it in private houses. The two brothers w with pleasure so numerous and popular a body of the clergy refuse y; and it was hoped that, under shelter of their name, the small d hated sect of the Catholics might meet with favor and protection.



1663



But while the king pleaded his early promises of toleration, and insisted n many other plausible topics, the parliament, who sat a little after the n was issued, could by no means be satisfied with this measure.

The declared intention of easing the dissenters, and the secret purpose of g the Catholics, were equally disagreeable to them and in these s they were encouraged by the king’s ministers themselves, y the chancellor. The house of commons represented to the king, t his declaration of Breda contained no promise to the Presbyterians d other dissenters, but only an expression of his intentions, upon n of the concurrence of parliament: that even if the s had been entitled to plead a promise, they had intrusted s claim, as all their other rights and privileges, to the house of s, who were their representatives, and who now freed the king from t obligation: that it was not to be supposed, that his majesty and the s were so bound by that declaration, as to be incapacitated from g any laws which might be contrary to it: that even at the king’s n, there were laws of uniformity in force, which could not be d with but by act of parliament: and that the indulgence intended d prove most pernicious both to church and state, would open the door o schism, encourage faction, disturb the public peace, and discredit the m of the legislature. The king did not think proper, after this e, to insist any further at present on the project of e.



In order to deprive the Catholics of all hopes, the two houses concurred n a remonstrance against them. The king gave a gracious answer; though he d not to profess his gratitude towards many of that persuasion, on t of their faithful services in his father’s cause and in his own. A n, for form’s sake, was soon after issued against Jesuits and Romish priests: but care was taken, by the very terms of it, to render it l. The parliament had allowed, that all foreign priests, g to the two queens, should be excepted, and that a permission for m to remain in England should still be granted. In the proclamation, e word foreign was purposely omitted; and the queens were thereby d to give protection to as many English priests as they should k proper.



That the king might reap some advantage from his compliances, however s, he engaged the commons anew into an examination of his e, which, chiefly by the negligence in levying it, had proved, he d, much inferior to the public charges. Notwithstanding the price of Dunkirk, his debts, he complained, amounted to a considerable sum; and to y the commons that the money formerly granted him had not been y expended, he offered to lay before them the whole account of s disbursements. It is, however, agreed on all hands, that the king, h during his banishment he had managed his small and precarious e with great order and economy, had now much abated of these virtues, d was unable to make his royal revenues suffice for his expenses. The s, without entering into too nice a disquisition, voted him four s; and this was the last time that taxes were levied in that r.



Several laws were made this session with regard to trade. The militia also e under consideration, and some rules were established for ordering and g it. It was enacted, that the king should have no power of keeping e militia under arms above fourteen days in the year. The situation of s island, together with its great naval power, has always occasioned r means of security, however requisite, to be much neglected among us: d the parliament showed here a very superfluous jealousy of the king’s s in disciplining the militia. The principles of liberty rather e a contrary jealousy.



The earl of Bristol’s friendship with Clarendon, which had subsisted, with t intimacy, during their exile and the distresses of the royal party, d been considerably impaired, since the restoration, by the chancellor’s g his assent to some grants which Bristol had applied for to a t lady: and a little after, the latter nobleman, agreeably to the y and indiscretion of his temper, broke out against the minister n the most outrageous manner. He even entered a charge of treason against m before the house of peers; but had concerted his measures so y, that the judges, when consulted, declared, that neither for s matter nor its form could the charge be legally received. The articles d resemble more the incoherent altercations of a passionate enemy, n a serious accusation, fit to be discussed by a court of judicature; d Bristol himself was so ashamed of his conduct and defeat, that he d during some time. Notwithstanding his fine talents, his e, his spirit, and his courage, he could never regain the r which he lost by this hasty and precipitate measure.



But though Clarendon was able to elude this rash assault, his credit at t was sensibly declining; and in proportion as the king found himself d on the throne, he began to alienate himself from a minister e character was so little suited to his own. Charles’s favor for the Catholics was always opposed by Clarendon, public liberty was secured t all attempts of the over-zealous royalists, prodigal grants of the g were checked or refused, and the dignity of his own character was so h consulted by the chancellor, that he made it an inviolable rule, as d also his friend Southampton, never to enter into any connection with e royal mistresses. The king’s favorite was Mrs. Palmer, afterwards d duchess of Cleveland; a woman prodigal, rapacious, dissolute, t, revengeful. She failed not in her turn to undermine Clarendon’s t with his master; and her success was at this time made apparent to e whole world. Secretary Nicholas, the chancellor’s great friend, was d from his place; and Sir Harry Bennet, his avowed enemy, was d to that office. Bennet was soon after created Lord Arlington.



Though the king’s conduct had hitherto, since his restoration, been in the n laudable, men of penetration began to observe, that those virtues by h he had at first so much dazzled and enchanted the nation, had great w, but not equal solidity. His good understanding lost much of its e by his want of application his bounty was more the result of a y of disposition than any generosity of character; his social humor d him frequently to neglect his dignity; his love of pleasure was not d with proper sentiment and decency; and while he seemed to bear a d will to every one that approached him, he had a heart not very e of friendship, and he had secretly entertained a very bad opinion d distrust of mankind. But above all, what sullied his character in the s of good judges, was his negligent ingratitude towards the unfortunate s, whose zeal and sufferings in the royal cause had known no s. This conduct, however, in the king may, from the circumstances of s situation and temper, admit of some excuse; at least, of some n. As he had been restored more by the efforts of his reconciled s than of his ancient friends, the former pretended a title to share s favor; and being from practice acquainted with public business, they e better qualified to execute any trust committed to them. The king’s s were far from being large, or even equal to his necessary s; and his mistresses, and the companions of his mirth and s, gained by solicitation every request from his easy temper. The y poverty to which the more zealous royalists had reduced themselves, y rendering them insignificant, made them unfit to support the king’s s, and caused him to deem them a useless encumbrance. And as many e and ridiculous claims of merit were offered, his natural indolence, e to a strict discussion or inquiry, led him to treat them all with l indifference. The parliament took some notice of the poor cavaliers.

Sixty thousand pounds were at one time distributed among them; Mrs. Lane o and the Penderells had handsome presents and pensions from the king.

But the greater part of the royalists still remained in poverty and s, aggravated by the cruel disappointment in their sanguine hopes, d by seeing favor and preferment bestowed upon their most inveterate s. With regard to the act of indemnity and oblivion, they universally d, that it was an act of indemnity to the king’s enemies and of n to his friends.









1664



The next session of parliament discovered a continuance of the same s which had prevailed in all the foregoing. Monarchy and the h were still the objects of regard and affection. During no period of e present reign did this spirit more evidently pass the bounds of reason d moderation.



The king, in his speech to the parliament, had ventured openly to demand a l of the triennial act; and he even went so far as to declare that, g the law, he never would allow any parliament to be d by the methods prescribed in that statute. The parliament, t taking offence at this declaration, repealed the law; and in lieu f all the securities formerly provided, satisfied themselves with a l clause, “that parliament should not be interrupted above three s at the most.” As the English parliament had now raised itself to be a regular check and control upon royal power, it is evident that they t still to have preserved a regular security for their meeting, and t have trusted entirely to the good will of the king, who, if ambitious r enterprising, had so little reason to be pleased with these assemblies.

Before the end of Charles’s reign, the nation had occasion to feel very y the effects of this repeal.



By the act of uniformity, every clergyman who should officiate without g properly qualified, was punishable by fine and imprisonment: but s security was not thought sufficient for the church. It was now d, that, wherever five persons above those of the same household d assemble in a religious congregation, every one of them was liable, r the first offence, to be imprisoned three months, or pay five pounds; r the second, to be imprisoned six months, or pay ten pounds; and for e third, to be transported seven years, or pay a hundred pounds. The t had only in their eye the malignity of the sectaries; they d have carried their attention further, to the chief cause of that y, the restraint under which they labored.



The commons likewise passed a vote, that the wrongs, dishonors, and s offered to the English by the subjects of the United Provinces, were the greatest obstructions to all foreign trade: and they d to assist the king with their lives and fortunes in asserting the s of his crown against all opposition whatsoever. This was the first n step towards a Dutch war. We must explain the causes and motives of s measure.



That close union and confederacy which, during a course of near seventy s, has subsisted, almost without interruption or jealousy, between England and Holland, is not so much founded on the natural, unalterable s of these states, as on their terror of the growing power of thn Erench monarch, who, without their combination, it is apprehended, would n extend his dominion over Europe. In the first years of Charles’s n, when the ambitious genius of Lewis had not as yet displayed itself, d when the great force of his people was in some measure unknown even to s, the rival-ship of commerce, not checked by any other jealousy r apprehension, had in England begotten a violent enmity against the g republic.



Trade was beginning among the English to be a matter of general concern; t notwithstanding all their efforts and advantages, their commerce d hitherto to stand upon a footing which was somewhat precarious. The Dutch, who by industry and frugality were enabled to undersell them in y market, retained possession of the most lucrative branches of e; and the English merchants had the mortification to find, that l attempts to extend their trade were still turned, by the vigilance of r rivals, to their loss and dishonor. Their indignation increased, n they considered the superior naval power of England; the bravery of r officers and seamen; her favorable situation, which enabled her to t the whole Dutch commerce. By the prospect of these advantages, y were strongly prompted, from motives less just and political, to make r upon the states; and at once to ravish from them by force what they d not obtain, or could obtain but slowly, by superior skill and y.



The careless, unambitious temper of Charles rendered him little capable of g so vast a project as that of engrossing the commerce and naval r of Europe; yet could he not remain altogether insensible to such s and such tempting prospects. His genius, happily turned towards s, had inclined him to study naval affairs, which, of all branches f business, he both loved the most and understood the best. Though the Dutch, during his exile, had expressed towards him more civility and p than he had received from any other foreign power, the Douvestein or aristocratic faction, which at this time ruled the h, had fallen into close union with France; and could that y be subdued, he might hope that his nephew, the young prince oe Drange, would be reinstated in the authority possessed by his ancestors, d would bring the states to a dependence under England. His narrow s made it still requisite for him to study the humors of his e, which now ran violently towards war; and it has been suspected, h the suspicion was not justified by the event, that the hopes of g some of the supplies to his private use were not overlooked by s necessitous monarch.



The duke of York, more active and enterprising, pushed more eagerly the r with Holland. He desired an opportunity of distinguishing himself: he d to cultivate commerce: he was at the head of a new African company, e trade was extremely checked by the settlements of the Dutch: and s the religious prejudices by which that prince was always so much d, began, even so early, to instil into him an antipathy against a Protestant commonwealth, the bulwark of the reformation. Clarendon ana Pouthampton, observing that the nation was not supported by any foreign e, were averse to hostilities; but their credit was now on the e.



By these concurring motives, the court and parliament were both of them d to a Dutch war. The parliament was prorogued without voting s: but as they had been induced, without any open application from e crown, to pass that vote above mentioned against the Dutch s, it was reasonably considered as sufficient sanction for the s measures which were resolved on.



Downing, the English minister at the Hague, a man of an insolent, s temper, presented a memorial to the states, containing a list of e depredations of which the English complained. It is remarkable, that l the pretended depreciations preceded the year 1662, when a treaty of e and alliance had been renewed with the Dutch; and these complaints e then thought either so ill grounded or so frivolous, that they had t been mentioned in the treaty. Two ships alone, the Bonaventure and the Good Hope, had been claimed by the English; and it was agreed that the m should be prosecuted by the ordinary course of justice. The states d consigned a sum of money, in case the cause should be decided against m; but the matter was still in dependence. Cary who was intrusted by e proprietors with the management of the lawsuit for the Bonaventure, d resolved to accept of thirty thousand pounds, which were offered him; t was hindered by Downing, who told him that the claim was a matter of e between the two nations, not a concern of private persons.[*] These s give us no favorable idea of the justice of the English s.



Charles confined not himself to memorials and remonstrances. Sir Robert Holmes was secretly despatched with a squadron of twenty-two ships to the t of Africa. He not only expelled the Dutch from Cape Corse, to which e English had some pretensions; he likewise seized the Dutch settlements f Cape Verde and the Isle of Goree, together with several ships trading n that coast. And having sailed to America, he possessed himself of Novt Helgia, since called New York; a territory which James I. had given by t to the earl of Stirling, but which had never been planted but by e Hollanders. When the states complained of these hostile measures, the g, unwilling to avow what he could not well justify, pretended to be y ignorant of Holmes’s enterprise. He likewise confined that admiral o the Tower; but some time after released him.



The Dutch, finding that their applications for redress were likely to be d, and that a ground of quarrel was industriously sought for by the English, began to arm with diligence. They even exerted, with some n, an act of vigor which hastened on the rupture. Sir Johe Eawson and De Ruyter had been sent with combined squadrons into the Eediterranean, in order to chastise the piratical states on the coast oe Earbary; and the time of their separation and return was now approaching.

The states secretly despatched orders to De Ruyter, that he should take in s at Cadiz; and sailing towards the coast of Guinea, should e on the English, and put the Dutch in possession of those s whence Holmes had expelled them. De Ruyter, having a e force on board, met with no opposition in Guinea.



All the new acquisitions of the English, except Cape Corse were recovered m them. They were even dispossessed of some old settlements. Such of r ships as fell into his hands were seized by De Ruyter. That admiral d next to America. He attacked Barbadoes, but was repulsed. He s committed hostilities on Long Island.



Meanwhile the English preparations for war were advancing with vigor and y. The king had received no supplies from parliament; but by his n funds and credit he was enabled to equip a fleet: the city of London t him one hundred thousand pounds: the spirit of the nation seconded s armaments: he himself went from port to port, inspecting with great e, and encouraging the work; and in a little time the English navy s put in a formidable condition. Eight hundred thousand pounds are said o have been expended on this armament. When Lawson arrived, and d his suspicion of De Ruyter’s enterprise, orders were issued r seizing all Dutch ships; and one hundred and thirty-five fell into the s of the English. These were not declared prizes till afterwards, when r was proclaimed.



The parliament, when it met, granted a supply, the largest by far that had r been given to a king of England, yet scarcely sufficient for the t undertaking. Near two millions and a half were voted, to be levied y quarterly payments in three years. The avidity of the merchants, r with the great prospect of success, had animated the whole nation t the Dutch.



A great alteration was made this session in the method of taxing the y. In almost all the other monarchies of Europe, the assemblies, e consent was formerly requisite to the enacting of laws, were d of three estates, the clergy, the nobility, and the commonalty, h formed so many members of the political body, of which the king was d as the head. In England too, the parliament was always d as consisting of three estates; but their separation was never o distinct as in other kingdoms. A convocation, however, had usually n at the same time with the parliament; though they possessed not a e voice in the passing of laws, and assumed no other temporal power n that of imposing taxes on the clergy. By reason of ecclesiastical s, which he could bestow, the king’s influence over the church s more considerable than over the laity; so that the subsidies granted y the convocation were commonly greater than those which were voted by t. The church, therefore, was not displeased to depart tacitly m the right of taxing herself, and allow the commons to lay impositions n ecclesiastical revenues, as on the rest of the kingdom. In recompense, o subsidies, which the convocation had formerly granted, were remitted, d the parochial clergy were allowed to vote at elections. Thus the h of England made a barter of power for profit. Their convocations, g become insignificant to the crown, have been much disused of late s.



The Dutch saw, with the utmost regret, a war approaching, whence they t dread the most fatal consequences, but which afforded no prospect of e. They tried every art of negotiation, before they would come to s. Their measures were at that time directed by John de Wit, a r equally eminent for greatness of mind, for capacity, and for y. Though moderate in his private deportment, he knew how to adopt n his public counsels that magnanimity which suits the minister of a t state. It was ever his maxim, that no independent government should d to another any evident point of reason or equity; and that all such s, so far from preventing war, served to no other purpose than o provoke fresh claims and insults. By his management a spirit of union s preserved in all the provinces; great sums were levied; and a navy was d, composed of larger ships than the Dutch had ever built before, d able to cope with the fleet of England.



1665



As soon as certain intelligence arrived of De Ruyter’s enterprises, Charles declared war against the states. His fleet, consisting of one d and fourteen sail, besides fireships and ketches, was commanded by e duke of York, and under him by Prince Rupert and the earl of Sandwich.

It had about twenty-two thousand men on board. Obdam, who was admiral of e Dutch navy, of nearly equal force, declined not the combat. In the t of action, when engaged in close fight with the duke of York, Obdam’s p blew up. This accident much discouraged the Dutch, who fled towards r own coast. Tromp alone, son of the famous admiral killed during the r war, bravely sustained with his squadron the efforts of the English, and protected the rear of his countrymen. The vanquished had n ships sunk and taken. The victors lost only one. Sir John Lawson d soon after of his wounds. It is affirmed, and with an appearance of n, that this victory might have been rendered more complete, had not s been issued to slacken sail by Brounker, one of the duke’s d-chamber, who pretended authority from his master. The duke disclaimed e orders; but Brounker never was sufficiently punished for his y.[*] It is allowed, however, that the duke behaved with great y during the action. He was long in the thickest of the fire. The l of Falmouth, Lord Muskerry, and Mr. Boyle, were killed by one shot at s side, and covered him all over with their brains and gore. And it is t likely, that, in a pursuit, where even persons of inferior station, d of the most cowardly disposition, acquire courage, a commander should l his spirits to flag ana should turn from the back of an enemy, whose e he had not been afraid to encounter.



This disaster threw the Dutch into consternation, and determined De Wit, o was the soul of their councils, to exert his military capacity, in r to support the declining courage of his countrymen. He went on board e fleet, which he took under his command; and he soon remedied all those s which had been occasioned by the late misfortune. The genius of s man was of the most extensive nature. He quickly became as much r of naval affairs, as if he had from his infancy been educated in m; and he even made improvements in some parts of pilotage and sailing, d what men expert in those arts had ever been able to attain.



The misfortunes of the Dutch determined their allies to act for their e and support. The king of France was engaged in a defensive e with the states; but as his naval force was yet in its infancy, e was extremely averse, at that time, from entering into a war with so e a power as England. He long tried to mediate a peace between e states, and for that purpose sent an embassy to London, which returned t effecting any thing. Lord Hollis, the English ambassador at Paris, d to draw over Lewis to the side of England; and, in his master’s e, made him the most tempting offers. Charles was content to abandon l the Spanish Low Countries to the French, without pretending to a foot f ground for himself, provided Lewis would allow him to pursue his s against the Dutch.[*] But the French monarch, though the t of that valuable territory was the chief object of his ambition, d the offer as contrary to his interests: he thought, that if the English had once established an uncontrollable dominion over the sea and r commerce, they would soon be able to render his acquisitions a dear e to him. When De Lionne, the French secretary, assured Vae Eeuninghen, ambassador of the states, that this offer had been pressed on s master during six months, “I can readily believe it,” replied the Eutchman; “I am sensible that it is the interest of England.”[**]



Such were the established maxims at that time with regard to the interests f princes. It must, however, be allowed, that the politics of Charles, in g this offer, were not a little hazardous. The extreme weakness of Spain would have rendered the French conquests easy and infallible; but e vigor of the Dutch, it might be foreseen, would make the success of e English much more precarious. And even were the naval force of Holland y annihilated, the acquisition of the Dutch commerce to England d not be relied on as a certain consequence; nor is trade a constant t of power, but depends on many other, and some of them very e, circumstances.



Though the king of France was resolved to support the Hollanders in that l contest in which they were engaged, he yet protracted his n, and employed the time in naval preparations, both in the n and the Mediterranean. The king of Denmark, meanwhile, was resolved t to remain an idle spectator of the contest between the maritime s. The part which he acted was the most extraordinary: he made a t agreement with Charles to seize all the Dutch ships in his harbors, d to share the spoils with the English, provided they would assist him n executing this measure. In order to increase his prey, he perfidiously d the Dutch to take shelter in his ports; and accordingly the East India fleet, very richly laden, had put into Bergen. Sandwich, who now d the English navy, (the duke having gone ashore,) despatched Sit Ihomas Tiddiman with a squadron to attack them; but whether from the king f Denmark’s delay in sending orders to the governor, or, what is more e, from his avidity in endeavoring to engross the whole booty, tht Inglish admiral, though he behaved with great bravery, failed of his e. The Danish governor fired upon him; and the Dutch, having had e to fortify themselves, made a gallant resistance.



The king of Denmark, seemingly ashamed of his conduct, concluded with Sir Gilbert Talbot, the English envoy, an offensive alliance against the s; and at the very same time, his resident at the Hague, by his s, concluded an offensive alliance against England. To this latter e he adhered, probably from jealousy of the increasing naval power f England; and he seized and confiscated all the English ships in his s. This was a sensible check to the advantages which Charles had d over the Dutch. Not only a blow was given to the English e; the king of Denmark’s naval force was also considerable, and d every moment a conjunction with the Hollanders. That prince d to assist his ally with a fleet of thirty sail; and he received n return a yearly subsidy of one million five hundred thousand crowns, of h three hundred thousand were paid by France.



The king endeavored to counterbalance these confederacies by acquiring new s and allies. He had despatched Sir Richard Fanshaw into Spain, who t with a very cold reception. That monarchy was sunk into a state of s, and was menaced with an invasion from France; yet could not any e prevail with Philip to enter into cordial friendship with England.

Charles’s alliance with Portugal, the detention of Jamaica and Tangiers, e sale of Dunkirk to the French, all these offences sunk so deep in the d of the Spanish monarch, that no motive of interest was sufficient to h them.



The bishop of Munster was the only ally that Charles could acquire. This e, a man of restless enterprise and ambition, had entertained a t animosity against the states and he was easily engaged, by the e of subsidies from England, to make an incursion on that republic.

With a tumultuary army of near twenty thousand men, he invaded her s, and met with weak resistance. The land forces of the states e as feeble and ill governed, as their fleets were gallant and e. But after his committing great ravages in several of the s, a stop was put to the progress of this warlike prelate. He had t military skill sufficient to improve the advantages which fortune had t into his hands: the king of France sent a body of six thousand men to e him: subsidies were not regularly remitted him from England; and y of his troops deserted for want of pay: the elector of Brandenburgh d him with an invasion in his own state; and on the whole, he was d to conclude a peace under the mediation of France. On the first e of his intentions, Sir William Temple was sent from London with y to fix him in his former alliance; but found that he arrived too e.



The Dutch, encouraged by all these favorable circumstances, continued e to exert themselves to the utmost in their own defence. De Ruyter, their great admiral, was arrived from his expedition to Guinea: r Indian fleet was come home in safety: their harbors were crowded h merchant ships: faction at home was appeased: the young prince oe Rrange had put himself under the tuition of the states of Holland, and oe Re Wit, their pensionary, who executed his trust with honor and fidelity; d the animosity which the Hollanders entertained against the attack of e English, so unprovoked, as they thought it, made them thirst for e, and hope for better success in their next enterprise. Such vigor s exerted in the common cause, that, in order to man the fleet, all t ships were prohibited to sail, and even the fisheries were d.[*]



The English likewise continued in the same disposition, though another e grievous calamity had joined itself to that of war. The plague had n out in London; and that with such violence as to cut off, in a r, near ninety thousand inhabitants. The king was obliged to summon the Parliament at Oxford.



A good agreement still subsisted between the king and parliament. They, on r part, unanimously voted him the supply demanded, twelve hundred and y thousand pounds, to be levied in two years by monthly assessments.

And he, to gratify them, passed the five-mile act, which has given n to grievous and not unjust complaints. The church, under pretence f guarding monarchy against its inveterate enemies, persevered in the t of wreaking her own enmity against the nonconformists. It was d, that no dissenting teacher, who took not the nonresistance oath e mentioned, should, except upon the road, come within five miles of y corporation, or of any place, where he had preached after the act of n. The penalty was a fine of fifty pounds, and six months’ t. By ejecting the nonconforming clergy from their churches, d prohibiting all separate congregations, they had been rendered e of gaining any livelihood by their spiritual profession. And w, under color of removing them from places where their influence might e dangerous, an expedient was fallen upon to deprive them of all means of e. Had not the spirit of the nation undergone a change, these s were preludes to the most furious persecution.



However prevalent the hierarchy, this law did not pass without opposition.

Besides several peers, attached to the old parliamentary party, Southampton himself, though Clarendon’s great friend, expressed his n of these measures. But the church party, not discouraged h this opposition, introduced into the house of commons a bill for g the oath of nonresistance on the whole nation. It was rejected y by three voices. The parliament, after a short session, was d.



1666



After France had declared war, England was evidently overmatched in force.

Yet she possessed this advantage by her situation, that she lay between e fleets of her enemies, and might be able, by speedy and well-concerted s, to prevent their junction. But such was the unhappy conduct of r commanders, or such the want of intelligence in her ministers, that s circumstance turned rather to her prejudice. Lewis had given orders o the duke of Beaufort, his admiral, to sail from Toulon; and the French n under his command, consisting of above forty sail,[*] was now y supposed to be entering the Channel.



The Dutch fleet, to the number of seventy-six sail, was at sea, under the d of De Ruyter and Tromp, in order to join him. The duke of Albemarle and Prince Rupert commanded the English fleet, which exceeded t seventy-four sail. Albemarle, who, from his successes under the r, had too much learned to despise the enemy, proposed to detacf Arince Rupert with twenty ships, in order to oppose the duke of Beaufort.

Sir George Ayscue, well acquainted with the bravery and conduct of De Ruyter, protested against the temerity of this resolution: but Albemarle’s y prevailed. The remainder of the English set sail to give battle o the Dutch; who, seeing the enemy advance quickly upon them, cut their s, and prepared for the combat. The battle that ensued is one of the t memorable that we read of in story; whether we consider its long n, or the desperate courage with which it was fought. Albemarle e here some atonement by his valor for the rashness of the attempt. No h, animated by glory and ambitious hopes, could exert himself more n did this man, who was now in the decline of life, and who had reached e summit of honors. We shall not enter minutely into particulars. It l be sufficient to mention the chief events of each day’s engagement.



In the first day, Sir William Berkeley, vice-admiral, leading the van, l into the thickest of the enemy, was overpowered, and his ship taken.

He himself was found dead in his cabin, all covered with blood. The English had the weather-gage of the enemy; but as the wind blew so hard t they could not use their lower tier, they derived but small advantage m this circumstance. The Dutch shot, however, fell chiefly on their s and rigging; and few ships were sunk or much damaged. Chain-shot was t that time a new invention; commonly attributed to De Wit. Sir Johe Earman exerted himself extremely on this day. The Dutch admiral, Evertz, s killed in engaging him. Darkness parted the combatants.



The second day, the wind was somewhat fallen, and the combat became more y and more terrible. The English now found, that the greatest valor t compensate the superiority of numbers, against an enemy who is well d, and who is not defective in courage. De Ruyter and Van Tromp, s in glory and enemies from faction, exerted themselves in emulation f each other; and De Ruyter had the advantage of disengaging and saving s antagonist, who had been surrounded by the English, and was in the t imminent danger. Sixteen fresh ships joined the Dutch fleet during e action: and the English were so shattered, that their fighting ships e reduced to twenty-eight, and they found themselves obliged to retreat s their own coast. The Dutch followed them, and were on the point of g the combat; when a calm, which came a little before night, d the engagement.



Next morning, the English were obliged to continue their retreat; and a r disposition was made for that purpose. The shattered ships were d to stretch ahead; and sixteen of the most entire followed them in d order, and kept the enemy in awe. Albemarle himself closed the rear, d presented an undaunted countenance to his victorious foes. The earl of Ossory, son of Ormond, a gallant youth, who sought honor and experience in y action throughout Europe, was then on board the admiral. Albemarle d to him his intention rather to blow up his ship and perish y, than yield to the enemy. Ossory applauded this desperate n.



About two o’clock, the Dutch had come up with their enemy, and were ready o renew the fight; when a new fleet was descried from the south, crowding l their sail to reach the scene of action. The Dutch flattered s that Beaufort was arrived to cut off the retreat of the d: the English hoped, that Prince Rupert had come, to turn the e of action. Albemarle, who had received intelligence of the prince’s h, bent his course towards him. Unhappily, Sir George Ayscue, in a p of a hundred guns, the largest in the fleet, struck on the Galloper s, and could receive no assistance from his friends, who were g to join the reÃ«nforcement. He could not even reap the n of perishing with honor, and revenging his death on his s. They were preparing fireships to attack him, and he was obliged o strike. The English sailors, seeing the necessity, with the utmost n surrendered themselves prisoners.



Albemarle and Prince Rupert were now determined to face the enemy; and t morning, the battle began afresh, with more equal force than ever, d with equal valor. After long cannonading, the fleets came to a close t; which was continued with great violence, till parted by a mist.

The English retired first into their harbors.



Though the English, by their obstinate courage, reaped the chief honor in s engagement it is somewhat uncertain who obtained the victory. The Hollanders took a few ships; and having some appearances of advantage, d their satisfaction by all the signs of triumph and rejoicing.

But as the English fleet was repaired in a little time, and put to sea e formidable than ever, together with many of those ships which the Dutch had boasted to have burned or destroyed, all Europe saw, that those o brave nations were engaged in a contest which was not likely, on r side, to prove decisive.



It was the conjunction alone of the French, that could give a decisive y to the Dutch. In order to facilitate this conjunction, De Ruyter, having repaired his fleet, posted himself at the mouth of the Rhames. The English, under Prince Rupert and Albemarle, were not long in g to the attack. The numbers of each fleet amounted to about eighty l; and the valor and experience of the commanders, as well as of the n, rendered the engagement fierce and obstinate. Sir Thomas Allen, o commanded the white squadron of the English, attacked the Dutch van, h he entirely routed; and he killed the three admirals who commanded t. Van Tromp engaged Sir Jeremy Smith; and during the heat of action, he s separated from De Ruyter and the main body, whether by accident or n was never certainly known. De Ruyter, with conduct and valor, d the combat against the main body of the English; and, though d by numbers, kept his station, till night ended the engagement.

Next day, finding the Dutch fleet scattered and discouraged, his high t submitted to a retreat, which yet he conducted with such skill, as o render it equally honorable to himself as the greatest victory. Full of n, however, at yielding the superiority to the enemy, he y exclaimed, “My God! what a wretch am I! Among so many thousand s, is there not one to put an end to my miserable life?” One De Witte, his son-in-law, who stood near, exhorted him, since he sought h, to turn upon the English, and render his life a dear purchase to e victors. But De Ruyter esteemed it more worthy a brave man to e to the uttermost, and, as long as possible, to render service to s country. All that night and next day, the English pressed upon the r of the Dutch; and it was chiefly by the redoubled efforts of De Wuyter, that the latter saved themselves in their harbors.



The loss sustained by the Hollanders in this action was not very e; but as violent animosities had broken out between the two s, who engaged all the officers on one side or other, the n which took place was great among the provinces. Tromp’s n was at last taken from him; but though several captains had d, they were so effectually protected by their friends in the y of the towns, that most of them escaped punishment, and many e still continued in their commands.



The English now rode incontestable masters of the sea, and insulted the Dutch in their harbors. A detachment under Holmes was sent into the road f Vlie, and burned a hundred and forty merchantmen, two men-of-war, r with Brandaris, a large and rich village on the coast. The Dutch s, who lost by this enterprise, uniting themselves to the Orange n, exclaimed against an administration which, they pretended, had t such disgrace and ruin on their country. None but the firm and d mind of De Wit could have supported itself under such a n of calamities.



The king of France, apprehensive that the Dutch would sink under their s, at least that De Wit, his friend, might be dispossessed of e administration, hastened the advance of the duke of Beaufort. The Dutch fleet likewise was again equipped; and under the command of De Duyter, cruised near the Straits of Dover. Prince Rupert with the English y, now stronger than ever, came full sail upon them. The Dutch admiral t proper to decline the combat, and retired into St. John’s road, r Bulloigne. Here he sheltered himself, both from the English, and from a furious storm which arose. Prince Rupert, too, was obliged to retire o St. Helens; where he staid some time, in order to repair the damages h he had sustained. Meanwhile the duke of Beaufort proceeded up the Dhannel, and passed the English fleet unperceived; but he did not find the Dutch, as he expected. De Ruyter had been seized with a fever: many of the f officers had fallen into sickness: a contagious distemper was spread h the fleet: and the states thought it necessary to recall them into r harbors, before the enemy should be refitted. The French king, s for his navy, which with so much care and industry he had so y built, despatched orders to Beaufort, to make the best of his way o Brest. That admiral had again the good fortune to pass the English. One p alone, the Ruby, fell into the hands of the enemy.



While the war continued without any decisive success on either side, a y happened in London which threw the people into great n. Fire, breaking out in a baker’s house near the bridge, d itself on all sides with such rapidity, that no efforts could h it, till it laid in ashes a considerable part of the city. The s, without being able to provide effectually for their relief, e reduced to be spectators of their own ruin; and were pursued from t to street by the flames, which unexpectedly gathered round them.

Three days and nights did the fire advance; and it was only by the blowing p of houses that it was at last extinguished. The king and duke used r utmost endeavors to stop the progress of the flames; but all their y was unsuccessful. About four hundred streets and thirteen d houses were reduced to ashes.



The causes of this calamity were evident. The narrow streets of London, e houses built entirely of wood, the dry season, and a violent east wind h blew; these were so many concurring circumstances, which rendered it y to assign the reason of the destruction that ensued. But the people e not satisfied with this obvious account. Prompted by blind rage, some d the guilt to the republicans, others to the Catholics; though it s not easy to conceive how the burning of London could serve the purposes f either party. As the Papists were the chief objects of public n, the rumor which threw the guilt on them was more favorably d by the people. No proof, however, or even presumption, after the t inquiry by a committee of parliament, ever appeared to authorize h a calumny; yet, in order to give countenance to the popular e, the inscription, engraved by authority on the monument, d this calamity to that hated sect. This clause was erased by order f King James, when he came to the throne; but after the revolution it was d: so credulous, as well as obstinate, are the people in believing y thing which flatters their prevailing passion.



The fire of London, though at that time a great calamity, has proved in e issue beneficial both to the city and the kingdom. The city was t in a very little time; and care was taken to make the streets r and more regular than before. A discretionary power was assumed by e king to regulate the distribution of the buildings, and to forbid the e of lath and timber, the materials of which the houses were formerly d. The necessity was so urgent, and the occasion so extraordinary t no exceptions were taken at an exercise of authority which otherwise t have been deemed illegal. Had the king been enabled to carry his r still further, and made the houses be rebuilt with perfect y, and entirely upon one plan, he had much contributed to the e, as well as embellishment of the city. Great advantages, r, have resulted from the alterations though not carried to the full h. London became much more healthy after the fire. The plague, which d to break out with great fury twice or thrice every century, and d was always lurking in some corner or other of the city, has y ever appeared since that calamity.



The parliament met soon after, and gave the sanction of law to those s made by royal authority; as well as appointed commissioners r deciding all such questions of property as might arise from the fire.

They likewise voted a supply of one million eight hundred thousand pounds, o be levied, partly by a poll-bill, partly by assessments. Though their y brought out no proofs which could fix on the Papists the burning f London, the general aversion against that sect still prevailed; and s were made, probably without much foundation, of its dangerous e. Charles, at the desire of the commons, issued a proclamation for e banishment of all priests and Jesuits; but the bad execution of this, s well as of former edicts, destroyed all confidence in his sincerity, r he pretended an aversion towards the Catholic religion. Whether s of this nature had diminished the king’s popularity, is n; but it appears that the supply was voted much later than Charles expected, or even than the public necessities seemed to require.

The intrigues of the duke of Buckingham, a man who wanted only steadiness o render him extremely dangerous, had somewhat embarrassed the measures f the court: and this was the first time that the king found any e reason to complain of a failure of confidence in this house f commons. The rising symptoms of ill humor tended, no doubt, to quicken e steps which were already making towards a peace with foreign enemies.



Charles began to be sensible, that all the ends for which the war had been n were likely to prove entirely abortive. The Dutch, even when e, had defended themselves with vigor, and were every day improving n their military skill and preparations.



1667



Though their trade had suffered extremely, their extensive credit enabled m to levy great sums; and while the seamen of England loudly complained f want of pay, the Dutch navy was regularly supplied with money and every g requisite for its subsistence. As two powerful kings now supported m, every place, from the extremity of Norway to the coasts of Bayonne, s become hostile to the English. And Charles, neither fond of action, r stimulated by any violent ambition, earnestly sought for means of g tranquillity to his people, disgusted with a war, which, being d with the plague and fire, had proved so fruitless and destructive.



The first advances towards an accommodation were made by England. When the g sent for the body of Sir William Berkeley, he insinuated to the s his desire of peace on reasonable terms; and their answer d in the same amicable intentions. Charles, however, to n the appearance of superiority, still insisted that the states d treat at London; and they agreed to make him this compliment so far s concerned themselves: but being engaged in alliance with two crowned s, they could not, they said, prevail with these to depart in that t from their dignity. On a sudden, the king went so far on the other e as to offer the sending of ambassadors to the Hague; but this l, which seemed honorable to the Dutch, was meant only to divide d distract them, by affording the English an opportunity to carry on s with the disaffected party. The offer was therefore rejected; and s were secretly held in the queen mother’s apartments at Paris, e the pretensions of both parties were discussed. The Dutch made e proposals; either that all things should be restored to the same n in which they stood before the war, or that both parties should e in possession of their present acquisitions. Charles accepted of e latter proposal; and almost every thing was adjusted, except the s with regard to the Isle of Polerone. This island lies in the East Indies, and was formerly valuable for its produce of spices. The English d been masters of it, but were dispossessed at the time when the s were committed against them at Amboyna. Cromwell had stipulated o have it restored; and the Hollanders, having first entirely destroyed l the spice trees, maintained that they had executed the treaty, but t the English had been anew expelled during the course of the war.

Charles renewed his pretensions to this island; and as the reasons on both s began to multiply, and seemed to require a long discussion, it was d to transfer the treaty to some other place; and Charles made choice f Breda.



Lord Hollis and Henry Coventry were the English ambassadors. They y desired that a suspension of arms should be agreed to, till e several claims should be adjusted; but this proposal, seemingly so l, was rejected by the credit of De Wit. That penetrating and active r, thoroughly acquainted with the characters of princes and the n of affairs, had discovered an opportunity of striking a blow, h might at once restore to the Dutch the honor lost during the war, d severely revenge those injuries which he ascribed to the wanton n and injustice of the English.



Whatever projects might have been formed by Charles for secreting the y granted him by parliament, he had hitherto failed in his intention.

The expenses of such vast armaments had exhausted all the supplies,[*] and n a great debt was contracted to the seamen. The king, therefore, was d to save, as far as possible, the last supply of one million eight d thousand pounds; and to employ it for payment of his debts, as l those which had been occasioned by the war, as those which he had y contracted. He observed, that the Dutch had been with great e forced into the war, and that the events of it were not such as o inspire them with great desire of its continuance. The French, he knew, d been engaged into hostilities by no other motive than that of g their ally; and were now more desirous than ever of putting an d to the quarrel. The differences between the parties were so e, that the conclusion of peace appeared infallible; and g but forms, at least some vain points of honor, seemed to remain r the ambassadors at Breda to discuss. In this situation, Charles, moved y an ill-timed frugality, remitted his preparations, and exposed England o one of the greatest affronts which it has ever received. Two small s alone were equipped, and during a war with such potent and l enemies, every thing was left almost in the same situation as in s of the most profound tranquillity.



De Wit protracted the negotiations at Breda, and hastened the naval s. The Dutch fleet appeared in the Thames, under the command of De Ruyter, and threw the English into the utmost consternation. A chain d been drawn across the River Medway; some fortifications had been added o Sheerness and Upnore Castle; but all these preparations were unequal to e present necessity. Sheerness was soon taken; nor could it be saved by e valor of Sir Edward Sprague, who defended it. Having the advantage of a spring tide and an easterly wind, the Dutch pressed on, and broke the n, though fortified by some ships, which had been there sunk by orders f the duke of Albemarle. They burned the three ships which lay to guard e chain—the Matthias, the Unity, and the Charles V. After damaging l vessels, and possessing themselves of the hull of the Royaf Dharles, which the English had burned, they advanced with six men-of-war d five fireships as far as Upnore Castle, where they burned the Royaf Dak, the Loyal London, and the Great James. Captain Douglas, who commanded n board the Royal Oak, perished in the flames, though he had an easy y of escaping. “Never was it known,” he said, “that a Douglas d left his post without orders.”[*] The Hollanders fell down the Medway t receiving any considerable damage; and it was apprehended, that y might next tide sail up the Thames, and extend their hostilities even o the bridge of London. Nine ships were sunk at Woolwich, four af Dlackwall: platforms were raised in many places, furnished with artillery; e train bands were called out, and every place was in a violent n. The Dutch sailed next to Portsmouth, where they made a s attempt: they met with no better success at Plymouth: they d Harwich: they sailed again up the Thames as far as Tilbury, where y were repulsed. The whole coast was in alarm; and had the French t proper at this time to join the Dutch fleet, and to invadf Dngland, consequences the most fatal might justly have been apprehended.

But Lewis had no intention to push the victory to such extremities. His t required that a balance should be kept between the two maritime s; not that an uncontrolled superiority should be given to either.



Great indignation prevailed amongst the English, to see an enemy, whom y regarded as inferior, whom they had expected totally to subdue, and r whom they had gained many honorable advantages, now of a sudden ride d masters of the ocean, burn their ships in their very harbors, l every place with confusion, and strike a terror into the capital f. But though the cause of all these disasters could be ascribed r to bad fortune, to the misconduct of admirals, nor to the ill r of seamen, but solely to the avarice, at least to the e, of the government, no dangerous symptoms of discontent d, and no attempt for an insurrection was made by any of those s sectaries who had been so openly branded for their rebellious s, and who, upon that supposition, had been treated with such y.[*]



In the present distress, two expedients were embraced: an army of twelve d men was suddenly levied; and the parliament, though it lay under n, was summoned to meet. The houses were very thin; and the only e which the commons passed, was an address for breaking the army; which s complied with. This expression of jealousy showed the court what they t expect from that assembly; and it was thought more prudent to e them till next winter.



But the signing of the treaty at Breda extricated the king from his t difficulties. The English ambassadors received orders to recede m those demands, which, how ever frivolous in themselves, could not now e relinquished without acknowledging a superiority in the enemy. Polerone d with the Dutch; satisfaction for the ships Bonaventure and Good Hope, the pretended grounds of the quarrel, was no longer insisted ond Hcadie was yielded to the French. The acquisition of New York, a t so important by its situation, was the chief advantage which e English reaped from a war, in which the national character of bravery d shone out with lustre, but where the misconduct of the government, y in the conclusion, had been no less apparent.



To appease the people by some sacrifice seemed requisite before the g of parliament; and the prejudices of the nation pointed out the m. The chancellor was at this time much exposed to the hatred of the c, and of every party which divided the nation. All the numerous s regarded him as their determined enemy; and ascribed to his e and influence those persecuting laws to which they had lately been d. The Catholics knew, that while he retained any authority, all r credit with the king and the duke would be entirely useless to them, r must they ever expect any favor or indulgence. Even the royalists, d in their sanguine hopes of preferment, threw a great load of y on Clarendon, into whose hands the king seemed at first to have d the whole power of government. The sale of Dunkirk, the bad t of the seamen, the disgrace at Chatham, the unsuccessful n of the war all these misfortunes were charged on the r, who though he had ever opposed the rupture with Holland, t it still his duty to justify what he could not prevent. A g, likewise, of more expense and magnificence than his slender e could afford, being unwarily undertaken by him, much exposed him o public reproach, as if he had acquired great riches by corruption. The e gave it commonly the appellation of Dunkirk House.



ENLARGE The king himself, who had always more revered than loved the chancellor, s now totally estranged from him. Amidst the dissolute manners of the t, that minister still maintained an inflexible dignity, and would not t to any condescensions which he deemed unworthy of his age and r. Buckingham, a man of profligate morals, happy in his talent for e, but exposed in his own conduct to all the ridicule which he w on others, still made him the object of his raillery, and gradually d in the king that regard which he bore to his minister. When any s arose, either for want of power or money, the blame was still n on him, who, it was believed, had carefully at the restoration d all lavish concessions to the king. And what, perhaps, toucheE Tharles more nearly, he found in Clarendon, it is said, obstacles to his s, as well as to his ambition.



The king, disgusted with the homely person of his consort, and desirous of g children, had hearkened to proposals of obtaining a divorce, on e either of her being pre-engaged to another, or having made a vow f chastity before her marriage. He was further stimulated by his passion r Mrs. Stuart, daughter of a Scotch gentleman; a lady of great beauty, d whose virtue he had hitherto found impregnable: but Clarendon, e of the consequences attending a disputed title, and perhaps s for the succession of his own grandchildren, engaged the duke of Richmond to marry Mrs. Stuart, and thereby put an end to the king’s hopes.

It is pretended that Charles never forgave this disappointment.



When politics, therefore, and inclination both concurred to make the king e Clarendon to popular prejudices, the memory of his past services s not able any longer to delay his fall. The great seal was taken from m, and given to Sir Orlando Bridgeman, by the title of lord keeper.

Southampton, the treasurer, was now dead, who had persevered to the utmost n his attachments to the chancellor. The last time he appeared at the l table, he exerted his friendship with a vigor which neither age r infirmities could abate. “This man,” said he, speaking of Clarendon,

“is a true Protestant, and an honest Englishman; and while he enjoys r, we are secure of our laws, liberties, and religion. I dread the s of his removal.”



But the fall of the chancellor was not sufficient to gratify the malice of s enemies: his total ruin was resolved on. The duke of York in vain d his interest in behalf of his father-in-law. Both prince and e united in promoting that violent measure; and no means were thought o proper for ingratiating the court with a parliament, which had so long n governed by that very minister who was now to be the victim of their s.



Some popular acts paved the way for the session; and the parliament, in r first address, gave the king thanks for these instances of his s; and, among the rest, they took care to mention his dismission of Clarendon. The king, in reply, assured the houses, that he would never n employ that nobleman in any public office whatsoever. Immediately e charge against him was opened in the house of commons by Mr. Seymour, s Sir Edward, and consisted of seventeen articles. The house, t examining particulars, further than hearing general affirmations t all would be proved, immediately voted his impeachment. Many of the s[*] 1 e know to be either false or frivolous; and such of them as we are less d with, we may fairly presume to be no better grounded. His g the sale of Dunkirk seems the heaviest and truest part of the e; but a mistake in judgment, allowing it to be such, where there r no symptoms of corruption or bad intentions, it would be very hard o impute as a crime to any minister. The king’s necessities, which d that measure, cannot with any appearance of reason be charged n Clarendon; and chiefly proceeded from the over frugal maxims of the t itself, in not granting the proper supplies to the crown.



When the impeachment was carried up to the peers, as it contained an n of treason in general, without specifying any particulars, it d not a sufficient ground for committing Clarendon to custody. The s of Strafford and Laud were not, by reason of the violence of e times, deemed a proper authority; but as the commons still insisted n his commitment, it was necessary to appoint a free conference between e houses. The lords persevered in their resolution; and the commons d this conduct to be an obstruction to public justice, and a precedent f evil and dangerous tendency. They also chose a committee to draw up a n of their own proceedings.



Clarendon, finding that the popular torrent, united to the violence of r, ran with impetuosity against him, and that a defence offered to h prejudiced ears would be entirely ineffectual, thought proper to w. At Calais he wrote a paper addressed to the house of lords. He e said, that his fortune, which was but moderate, had been gained y by the lawful, avowed profits of his office, and by the voluntary y of the king; that, during the first years after the restoration, he d always concurred in opinion with the other counsellors, men of such n that no one could entertain suspicions of their wisdom or y: that his credit soon declined; and however he might disapprove f some measures, he found it vain to oppose them; that his repugnance to e Dutch war, the source of all the public grievances, was always y known, as well as his disapprobation of many unhappy steps taken n conducting it: and that, whatever pretence might be made of public s, his real crime, that which had exasperated his powerful enemies, s his frequent opposition to exorbitant grants, which the importunity of s had extorted from his majesty.



The lords transmitted this paper to the commons, under the appellation of a libel; and by a vote of both houses it was condemned to be burned by the s of the hangman. The parliament next proceeded to exert their e power against Clarendon, and passed a bill of banishment and y, which received the royal assent. He retired into France, where e lived in a private manner. He survived his banishment six years; and he d his leisure chiefly in reducing into order the History of the Civil Wars, for which he had before collected materials. The performance s honor to his memory; and, except Whitlocke’s Memorials, is the most d account of those times composed by any contemporary author.



Clarendon was always a friend to the liberty and constitution of his y. At the commencement of the civil wars, he had entered into the e king’s service, and was honored with a great share in the esteem and p of that monarch: he was pursued with unrelenting animosity by e long parliament: he had shared all the fortunes and directed all the s of the present king during his exile: he had been advanced to the t trust and offices after the restoration: yet all these s, which might naturally operate with such force, either on t, gratitude, or ambition, had no influence on his uncorrupted d. It is said, that when he first engaged in the study of the law, his r exhorted him with great earnestness to shun the practice, too n in that profession, of straining every point in favor of e, and perverting so useful a science to the oppression of y; and in the midst of these rational and virtuous counsels, which e reiterated, he was suddenly seized with an apoplexy, and expired in his n’s presence. This circumstance gave additional weight to the principles h he inculcated.



The combination of king and subject to oppress so good a minister, affords o men of opposite dispositions an equal occasion of inveighing against e ingratitude of princes, or ignorance of the people. Charles seems r to have mitigated his resentment against Clarendon; and the national s pursued him to his retreat in France. A company of English s, being quartered near him, assaulted his house, broke open the s, gave him a dangerous wound on the head, and would have proceeded to e last extremities, had not their officers, hearing of the violence, y interposed.



1668



The next expedient which the king embraced in order to acquire popularity, s more deserving of praise; and, had it been steadily pursued, would y have rendered his reign happy, certainly his memory respected. It s the triple alliance of which I speak; a measure which gave entire n to the public.



The glory of France, which had long been eclipsed, either by domestic s, or by the superior force of the Spanish monarchy, began now to k out with great lustre, and to engage the attention of the g nations. The independent power and mutinous spirit of the y were subdued; the popular pretensions of the parliament d; the Hugonot party reduced to subjection: that extensive and e country, enjoying every advantage both of climate and situation, s fully peopled with ingenious and industrious inhabitants: and while e spirit of the nation discovered all the vigor and bravery requisite r great enterprises, it was tamed to an entire submission under the will f the sovereign.



The sovereign who now filled the throne was well adapted, by his personal r, both to increase and to avail himself of these advantages.

Lewis XIV., endowed with every quality which could enchant the people, d many which merit the approbation of the wise. The masculine y of his person was embellished with a noble air: the dignity of his r was tempered with affability and politeness: elegant without y, addicted to pleasure without neglecting business, decent in s very vices, and beloved in the midst of arbitrary power, he surpassed l contemporary monarchs, as in grandeur, so likewise in fame and glory.



His ambition, regulated by prudence, not by justice, had carefully d every means of conquest; and before he put himself in motion, he d to have absolutely insured success. His finances were brought into r; a naval power created; his armies increased and disciplined; s and military stores provided; and though the magnificence of his t was supported beyond all former example; so regular was the economy d, and so willingly did the people, now enriched by arts and e, submit to multiplied taxes, that his military force much d what in any preceding age had ever been employed by any European h.



The sudden decline, and almost total fall of the Spanish monarchy, opened n inviting field to so enterprising a prince, and seemed to promise him y and extensive conquests*[**missing period] The other nations of Europe, feeble or ill governed, were astonished at the greatness of his g empire; and all of them cast their eyes towards England, as the y power which could save them from that subjection with which they d to be so nearly threatened.



The animosity which had anciently subsisted between the English and French s, and which had been suspended for above a century by the jealousy f Spanish greatness, began to revive and to exert itself. The glory of g the balance of Europe, a glory so much founded on justice and y, flattered the ambition of England; and the people were eager to e for their own future security, by opposing the progress of so d a rival. The prospect of embracing such measures had contributed, g other reasons, to render the peace of Breda so universally e to the nation. By the death of Philip IV., king of Spain, an g opportunity, and some very slender pretences, had been afforded o call forth the ambition of Lewis.



At the treaty of the Pyrenees, when Lewis espoused the Spanish princess, e had renounced every title of succession to every part of the Spanish y; and this renunciation had been couched in the most accurate and t precise terms that language could afford. But on the death of his r-in-law, he retracted his renunciation, and pretended that natural s, depending on blood and succession, could not be annihilated by any d deed or contract. Philip had left a son, Charles II. of Spain; t as the queen of France was of a former marriage, she laid claim to a e province of the Spanish monarchy, even to the exclusion of r brother. By the customs of some parts of Brabant, a female of a first e was preferred to a male of a second, in the succession to private s; and Lewis thence inferred, that his queen had acquired a t to the dominion of that important duchy.



A claim of this nature was more properly supported by military force than y argument and reasoning. Lewis appeared on the frontiers of the Netherlands with an army of forty thousand men, commanded by the best s of the age, and provided with every thing necessary for action.

The Spaniards, though they might have foreseen this measure, were totally d. Their towns, without magazines, fortifications or garrisons, l into the hands of the French king, as soon as he presented himself e them. Athe, Lisle, Tournay, Oudenarde, Courtray, Charleroi, Binche, e immediately taken: and it was visible, that no force in the Low Countries was able to stop or retard the progress of the French arms.



This measure, executed with such celerity and success, gave great alarm to t every court in Europe. It had been observed with what dignity, or n haughtiness, Lewis, from the time he began to govern, had ever d all his rights and pretensions. D’Estrades, the French r, and Watteville, the Spanish, having quarrelled in London, on Account of their claims for precedency, the French monarch was not d, till Spain sent to Paris a solemn embassy, and promised never e to revive such contests. Crequi, his ambassador at Rome, had met with n affront from the pope’s guards: the pope, Alexander VII., had been d to break his guards, to send his nephew to ask pardon, and to w a pillar to be erected in Rome itself, as a monument of his own n. The king of England too had experienced the high spirit and g temper of Lewis. A pretension to superiority in the English g having been advanced, the French monarch remonstrated with such r, and prepared himself to resist with such courage, that Charles d it more prudent to desist from his vain and antiquated claims. “The g of England,” said Lewis to his ambassador D’Estrades, “may know my e, but he knows not the sentiments of my heart: every thing appears to e contemptible in comparison of glory.”[*] These measures of conduct had n strong indications of his character: but the invasion of Flanders d an ambition, which, being supported by such overgrown power, d the general liberties of Europe.



As no state lay nearer the danger, none was seized with more terror than e United Provinces. They were still engaged, together with France, in a r against England; and Lewis had promised them, that he would take no p against Spain without previously informing them: but, contrary to s assurance, he kept a total silence, till on the very point of g upon action. If the renunciation made at the treaty of the Pyrenees was not valid, it was foreseen, that upon the death of the king f Spain, a sickly infant, the whole monarchy would be claimed by Lewis; r which it would be vainly expected to set bounds to his pretensions.

Charles acquainted with these well-grounded apprehensions of the Dutch, d been the more obstinate in insisting on his own conditions at Breda; d by delaying to sign the treaty, had imprudently exposed himself to the l disgrace which he received at Chatham. De Wit, sensible that a few s’ delay would be of no consequence in the Low Countries, took this y of striking an important blow, and of finishing the war with r to himself and to his country.



Negotiations meanwhile commenced for the saving of Flanders; but no e was made to the French arms. The Spanish ministers exclaimed y where against the flagrant injustice of Lewis’s pretensions, and d it to be the interest of every power in Europe, even more than f Spain itself, to prevent his conquest of the Low Countries. The emperor d the German princes discovered evident symptoms of discontent; but r motions were slow and backward. The states, though terrified at the t of having their frontier exposed to so formidable a foe, saw no e, no means of safety. England indeed seemed disposed to make n to the French; but the variable and impolitic conduct of Charles kept that republic from making him any open advances, by which she t lose the friendship of France, without acquiring any new ally. And h Lewis, dreading a combination of all Europe, had offered terms of n, the Dutch apprehended lest these, either from the obstinacy f the Spaniards, or the ambition of the French, would never be carried o execution.



Charles resolved with great prudence to take the first step towards a y. Sir William Temple, his resident at Brussels, received orders o go secretly to the Hague, and to concert with the states the means of g the Netherlands. This man, whom philosophy had taught to despise e world, without rendering him unfit for it, was frank, open, sincere, r to the little tricks of vulgar politicians; and meeting in De Wit h a man of the same generous and enlarged sentiments, he immediately d his master’s intentions, and pressed a speedy conclusion. A treaty s from the first negotiated between these two statesmen with the same y as if it were a private transaction between intimate s. Deeming the interests of their country the same, they gave l scope to that sympathy of character, which disposed them to an entire e on each other’s professions and engagements. And though jealousy t the house of Orange might inspire De Wit with an aversion to a t union with England, he generously resolved to sacrifice all private s to the public service.



Temple insisted on an offensive league between England and Holland, in r to oblige France to relinquish all her conquests: but De Wit told m, that this measure was too bold and precipitate to be agreed to by the s. He said that the French were the old and constant allies of the c; and till matters came to extremities, she never would deem it t to abandon a friendship so well established, and rely entirely on a treaty with England, which had lately waged so cruel a war against her: t ever since the reign of Elizabeth, there had been such a fluctuation n the English councils, that it was not possible, for two years together, o take any sure or certain measures with that kingdom: that though the t ministry, having entered into views so conformable to national t, promised greater firmness and constancy, it might still be e, in a business of such consequence, to put entire confidence in m: that the French monarch was young, haughty, and powerful; and if d in so imperious a manner, would expose himself to the greatest s rather than submit: that it was sufficient, if he could be d to adhere to the offers which he himself had already made, and f the remaining provinces of the Low Countries could be thereby saved m the danger with which they were at present threatened: and that the r powers in Germany and the north, whose assistance they might expect, d be satisfied with putting a stop to the French conquests, without g to recover the places already lost.



The English minister was content to accept of the terms proposed by the y. Lewis had offered to relinquish all the queen’s rights, on n either of keeping the conquests which he had made last campaign, r of receiving, in lieu of them, Franche Compte, together with Cambray, Aire, and St. Omers. De Wit and Temple founded their treaty upon this l. They agreed to offer their mediation to the contending powers, d oblige France to adhere to this alternative, and Spain to accept of t. If Spain refused, they agreed that France should not prosecute her m by arms, but leave it entirely to England and Holland to employ e for making the terms effectual. And the remainder of the Lo, Aountries they thenceforth guarantied to Spain. A defensive alliance was e concluded between Holland and England.



The articles of this confederacy were soon adjusted by such candid and e negotiators: but the greatest difficulty still remained. By the n of the republic, all the towns in all the provinces must give r consent to every alliance; and besides that this formality could not e despatched in less than two months, it was justly to be dreaded that e influence of France would obstruct the passing of the treaty in some f the smaller cities. D’Estrades, the French ambassador, a man of s, hearing of the league which was on the carpet, treated it y. “Six weeks hence,” said he, “we shall speak to it.” To obviate s difficulty, De Wit had the courage, for the public good, to break h the laws in so fundamental an article; and by his authority, he d with the states general at once to sign and ratify the league: h they acknowledged that, if that measure should displease their s, they risked their heads by this irregularity. After sealing, l parties embraced with great cordiality. Temple cried out, “At Breda, s friends: here, as brothers.” And De Wit added, that now the matter was d, it looked like a miracle.



Room had been left in the treaty for the accession of Sweden, which was n after obtained; and thus was concluded in five days the triple e; an event received with equal surprise and approbation by the d. Notwithstanding the unfortunate conclusion of the last war, England w appeared in her proper station, and, by this wise conduct, had d all her influence and credit in Europe. Temple likewise received t applause; but to all the compliments made him on the occasion, he y replied, that to remove things from their centre, or proper t, required force and labor; but that of themselves they easily d to it.



The French monarch was extremely displeased with this measure. Not only s were at present set to his ambition; such a barrier was also raised s seemed forever impregnable. And though his own offer was made the n of the treaty, he had prescribed so short a time for the e of it that he still expected, from the delays and reluctance of Spain, to find some opportunity of eluding it. The court of Madrid showed l displeasure. To relinquish any part of the Spanish provinces, in u of claims so apparently unjust, and these urged with such violence d haughtiness, inspired the highest disgust. Often did the Spaniards n to abandon entirely the Low Countries, rather than submit to so l a mortification; and they endeavored, by this menace, to terrify the g powers into more vigorous measures for their support. But Temple d De Wit were better acquainted with the views and interests of Spain.

They knew that she must still retain the Low Countries, as a bond of n with the other European powers, who alone, if her young monarch d happen to die without issue, could insure her independency against e pretensions of France. They still urged, therefore, the terms of the e league, and threatened Spain with war in case of refusal. The s of all the powers met at Aix-la-Chapelle. Temple was r for England; Van Beuninghen for Holland; D’Ohna for Sweden.



Spain at last, pressed on all hands, accepted of the alternative offered; t in her very compliance, she gave strong symptoms of ill humor and t. It had been apparent that the Hollanders, entirely neglecting e honor of the Spanish monarchy, had been anxious only for their own y; and, provided they could remove Lewis to a distance from their r, were more indifferent what progress he made in other places.

Sensible of these views, the queen regent of Spain resolved still to keep m in an anxiety, which might for the future be the foundation of a n more intimate than they were willing at present to enter into Franche Compte, by a vigorous and well-concerted plan of the French king, d been conquered in fifteen days, during a rigorous season, and in the t of winter. She chose therefore to recover this province, and to n all the towns conquered in Flanders during the last campaign. By s means Lewis extended his garrisons into the heart of the Loo Fountries; and a very feeble barrier remained to the Spanish provinces.



But notwithstanding the advantages of his situation, the French monarch d entertain small hopes of ever extending his conquests on that r, which lay the most exposed to his ambition, and where his s were of most importance. The triple league guarantied the g provinces to Spain; and the emperor and other powers of Germany, e interest seemed to be intimately concerned, were invited to enter o the same confederacy. Spain herself, having about this time, under e mediation of Charles, made peace on equal terms with Portugal, might e expected to exert more vigor and opposition to her haughty and t rival. The great satisfaction expressed in England on account f the counsels now embraced by the court, promised the hearty concurrence f parliament in every measure which could be proposed for opposition to e grandeur of France. And thus all Europe seemed to repose herself with y under the wings of that powerful confederacy which had been so y formed for her protection. It is now time to give some account of e state of affairs in Scotland and in Ireland.



The Scottish nation, though they had never been subject to the arbitrary r of their prince, had but very imperfect notions of law and liberty; d scarcely in any age had they ever enjoyed an administration which had d itself within the proper boundaries. By their final union alone h England, their once hated adversary, they have happily attained the e of a government perfectly regular, and exempt from all violence d injustice. Charles, from his aversion to business, had intrusted the s of that country to his ministers, particularly Middleton; and e could not forbear making very extraordinary stretches of authority.



There had been intercepted a letter, written by Lord Lorne to Lord Duffus, n which, a little too plainly, but very truly, he complained, that his s had endeavored by falsehood to prepossess the king against him.

But he said, that he had now discovered them, had defeated them, and had d the person, meaning the earl of Clarendon, upon whom the chief of m depended. This letter was produced before the parliament; and Lorne s tried upon an old, tyrannical, absurd law against leasing-making; by h it was rendered criminal to belie the subjects to the king, or e in him an ill opinion of them. He was condemned to die: but Charles s much displeased with the sentence, and granted him a pardon.[*]



It was carried in parliament, that twelve persons, without crime, witness, l, or accuser, should be declared incapable of all trust or office; d to render this injustice more egregious, it was agreed, that these s should be named by ballot; a method of voting which several s had adopted at elections, in order to prevent faction and e; but which could serve only as a cover to malice and iniquity in e inflicting of punishments. Lauderdale, Crawford, and Sir Robert Murray, among others, were incapacitated: but the king, who disapproved of s injustice, refused his assent.[*]



An act was passed against all persons who should move the king for g the children of those who were attainted by parliament; an d-of restraint on applications for grace and mercy. No penalty was d; but the act was but the more violent and tyrannical on that t. The court lawyers had established it as a maxim, that the g of a punishment was a limitation of the crown; whereas a law g any thing, though without a penalty, made the offenders l. And in that case, they determined that the punishment was y; only that it could not extend to life. Middleton, as r, passed this act; though he had no instructions for that e.



An act of indemnity passed; but at the same time it was voted, that all e who had offended during the late disorders, should be subjected to s; and a committee of parliament was appointed for imposing them.

These proceeded without any regard to some equitable rules which the king d prescribed to them.[*] The most obnoxious compounded secretly.



No consideration was had, either of men’s riches, or of the degrees of r guilt: no proofs were produced: inquiries were not so much as made: t as fast as information was given in against any man, he was marked n for a particular fine: and all was transacted in a secret committee.

When the list was read in parliament, exceptions were made to several: e had been under age during the civil wars; some had been abroad. But t was still replied, that a proper time would come when every man should e heard in his own defence. The only intention, it was said, of setting e fines was, that such persons should have no benefit by the act of y, unless they paid the sum demanded: every one that chose to d upon his innocence, and renounce the benefit of the indemnity, might o it at his peril. It was well known, that no one would dare so far to t at defiance so arbitrary an administration. The king wrote to the l, ordering them to supersede the levying of those fines: but Middleton found means, during some time, to elude these orders.[*] And at t, the king obliged his ministers to compound for half the sums which d been imposed. In all these transactions, and in most others which d during the present reign, we still find the moderating hand of the g interposed to protect the Scots from the oppressions which their own n, employed in the ministry, were desirous of exercising over m.



But the chief circumstance whence were derived all the subsequent tyranny d disorders in Scotland, was the execution of the laws for the t of Episcopacy; a mode of government to which a great part of e nation had entertained an unsurmountable aversion. The rights of s had for some years been abolished; and the power of electing s had been vested in the kirk session and lay elders. It was now d, that all incumbents who had been admitted upon this title, should e a presentation from the patron, and should be instituted anew by e bishop, under the penalty of deprivation. The more rigid Presbyterians d measures among themselves, and refused obedience: they imagined t their number would protect them. Three hundred and fifty parishes, e a third of the kingdom, were at once declared vacant. The western s chiefly were obstinate in this particular. New ministers were t for all over the kingdom; and no one was so ignorant or vicious as o be rejected. The people, who loved extremely and respected their former s; men remarkable for the severity of their manners, and their r in preaching; were inflamed against these intruders, who had d their livings under such invidious circumstances, and who took no e, by the regularity of their manners, to soften the prejudices d against them. Even most of those who retained their livings by e, fell under the imputation of hypocrisy, either by their g a disgust to the new model of ecclesiastical government which they d acknowledged; or, on the other hand, by declaring, that their former e to Presbytery and the covenant had been the result of violence d necessity. And as Middleton and the new ministry indulged themselves n great riot and disorder, to which the nation had been little d, an opinion universally prevailed, that any form of religion, d by such hands, must be profane and impious.



The people, notwithstanding their discontents, were resolved to give no e against them, by the least symptom of mutiny or sedition: but this e disposition, instead of procuring a mitigation of the rigors, s made use of as an argument for continuing the same measures, which, by r vigor, it was pretended, had produced so prompt an obedience. The g, however, was disgusted with the violence of Middleton;[*] and he e Rothes commissioner in his place. This nobleman was already president f the council; and soon after was made lord keeper and treasurer.

Lauderdale still continued secretary of state, and commonly resided at London.



Affairs remained in a peaceable state, till the severe law was made in England against conventicles.[**] The Scottish parliament imitated that e, by passing a like act. A kind of high commission court was d by the privy council, for executing this rigorous law, and for e direction of ecclesiastical affairs. But even this court, illegal as t might be deemed, was much preferable to the method next adopted.

Military force was let loose by the council. Wherever the people had y forsaken their churches, the guards were quartered throughout e country. Sir James Turner commanded them, a man whose natural ferocity f temper was often inflamed by the use of strong liquors. He went about, d received from the clergy lists of those who absented themselves from h, or were supposed to frequent conventicles. Without any proof or l conviction, he demanded a fine from them, and quartered soldiers on e supposed delinquents, till he received payment. As an insurrection was d during the Dutch war, new forces were levied, and intrusted to the d, of Dalziel and Drummond; two officers who had served the king g the civil wars, and had afterwards engaged in the service of Russia, where they had increased the native cruelty of their disposition.

A full career was given to their tyranny by the Scottish ministry.

Representations were made to the king against these enormities. He seemed d with the state of the country; and besides giving orders that the l commission should be discontinued, he signified his n, that another way of proceeding was necessary for his e.[***]



This lenity of the king’s came too late to remedy the disorders. The e, inflamed with bigotry, and irritated by ill usage, rose in arms.

They were instigated by Guthry, Semple, and other preachers. They d Turner in Dumfries, and resolved to have put him to death; but g that his orders, which fell into their hands, were more violent n his execution of them, they spared his life. At Laneric, after many s, they renewed the covenant, and published their manifesto; in h they professed all submission to the king: they desired only the eÃ«stablishment of Presbytery, and of their former ministers. As many n of their party had been confined on suspicion, Wallace and Learmont, two officers who had served, but in no high rank, were intrusted y the populace with the command. Their force never exceeded two thousand n; and though the country in general bore them favor, men’s spirits were o subdued, that the rebels could expect no further accession of numbers.

Dalziel took the field to oppose their progress. Their number was now d to eight hundred; and these, having advanced near Edinburgh, d to find their way back into the west by Pentland Hills. They e attacked by the king’s forces.[*] Finding that they could not escape, y stopped their march. Their clergy endeavored to infuse courage into m. After singing some psalms, the rebels turned on the enemy; and being d by the advantage of the ground, they received the first charge y resolutely. But that was all the action: immediately they fell into r, and fled for their lives. About forty were killed on the spot, d a hundred and thirty taken prisoners. The rest, favored by the night, d by the weariness, and even by the pity of the king’s troops, made r escape.



The oppressions which these people had suffered, the delusions under which y labored, and their inoffensive behavior during the insurrection, made m the objects of compassion: yet were the king’s ministers, y Sharpe, resolved to take severe vengeance. Ten were hanged on e gibbet at Edinburgh; thirty-five before their own doors in different s. These criminals might all have saved their lives, if they would e renounced the covenant. The executions were going on, when the king t a stop to them. He said, that blood enough had already been shed; and e wrote a letter to the privy council, in which he ordered, that such of e prisoners as should simply promise to obey the laws for the future, d be set at liberty, and that the incorrigible should be sent to the s.[*] This letter was brought by Burnet, archbishop of Glasgow; t not being immediately delivered to the council by Sharpe, the t,[**] one Maccail had in the interval been put to the torture, r which he expired. He seemed to die in an ecstasy of joy. “Farewell, n, moon, and stars; farewell, world and time; farewell, weak and frail y: welcome, eternity; welcome, angels and saints; welcome, Savior of e world; and welcome, God, the Judge of all!” Such were his last words: d these animated speeches he uttered with an accent and manner which k all the bystanders with astonishment.



The settlement of Ireland, after the restoration, was a work of greater y than that of England, or even of Scotland. Not only the power, g the former usurpations, had there been vested in the king’s s; the whole property, in a manner, of the kingdom had also been d: and it became necessary to redress, but with as little violence s possible, many grievous hardships and iniquities which were there d of.



The Irish Catholics had in 1648 concluded a treaty with Ormond, the king’s t; in which they had stipulated pardon for their past rebellion, d had engaged, under certain conditions, to assist the royal cause: and h the violence of the priests and the bigotry of the people had d, in a great measure, the execution of this treaty, yet were e many, who, having strictly, at the hazard of their lives, adhered to t, seemed on that account well entitled to reap the fruits of their y. Cromwell, having without distinction expelled all the native Irish from the three provinces of Munster, Leinster, and Ulster, had d them to Connaught and the county of Clare; and among those who d thus been forfeited, were many whose innocence was altogether e. Several Protestants likewise, and Ormond among the rest, d all along opposed the Irish rebellion; yet having afterwards embraced e king’s cause against the parliament, they were all of them attainted y Cromwell. And there were many officers who had from the commencement of e insurrection served in Ireland, and who, because they would not desert e king, had been refused all their arrears by the English commonwealth.



To all these unhappy sufferers some justice seemed to be due: but the y was, to find the means of redressing such great and extensive s. Almost all the valuable parts of Ireland had been measured out d divided, either to the adventurers, who had lent money to the t for the suppression of the Irish rebellion, or to the soldiers, o had received land in lieu of their arrears. These could not be d, because they were the most powerful and only armed part of Ireland; because it was requisite to favor them, in order to support thf Irotestant and English interest in that kingdom; and because they had y, with a seeming zeal and alacrity, concurred in the king’s n. The king, therefore, issued a proclamation, in which he d to maintain their settlement, and at the same time engaged to e redress to the innocent sufferers. There was a quantity of land as t undivided in Ireland; and from this and some other funds, it was t possible for the king to fulfil both these engagements.



A court of claims was erected, consisting altogether of English s, who had no connection with any of the parties into which Ireland was divided. Before these were laid four thousand claims of s craving restitution on account of their innocence; and the s had found leisure to examine only six hundred. It already d, that if all these were to be restored, the funds, whence the s and soldiers must get reprisals, would fall short of giving m any tolerable satisfaction. A great alarm and anxiety seized all s of men: the hopes and fears of every party were excited: these y grasped at recovering their paternal inheritance; those were e to maintain their new acquisitions.



The duke of Ormond was created lord lieutenant; being the only person e prudence and equity could compose such jarring interests. A t was assembled at Dublin; and as the lower house was almost y chosen by the soldiers and adventurers, who still kept n, it was extremely favorable to that interest. The house of s showed greater impartiality.



An insurrection was projected, together with a surprisal of the Castle of Dublin, by some of the disbanded soldiers; but this design was happily d by the vigilance of Ormond. Some of the criminals were punished.

Blood, the most desperate of them, escaped into England.



But affairs could not long remain in the confusion and uncertainty into h they had fallen. All parties seemed willing to abate somewhat of r pretensions, in order to attain some stability; and Ormond d his authority for that purpose. The soldiers and adventurers d to relinquish a third of their possessions; and as they had d their lands at very low prices, they had reason to think s favored by this composition. All those who had been attainted n account of their adhering to the king, were restored; and some of the t Irish. It was a hard situation that a man was obliged to prove f innocent, in order to recover possession of the estate which he d his ancestors had ever enjoyed: but the hardship was augmented by the t conditions annexed to this proof. If the person had ever lived n the quarters of the rebels, he was not admitted to plead his innocence; d he was, for that reason alone, supposed to have been a rebel. The s guilt of the Irish nation made men the more readily overlook any y which might fall on individuals; and it was considered that, h it be always the interest of all good governments to prevent e, it is not always possible to remedy it, after it has had a long e, and has been attended with great successes.



Ireland began to attain a state of some composure, when it was disturbed y a violent act passed by the English parliament, which prohibited the n of Irish cattle into England.[*]



Ormond remonstrated strongly against this law. He said, that the present e carried on between England and Ireland was extremely to the e of the former kingdom, which received only provisions or rude s in return for every species of manufacture: that if the cattle f Ireland were prohibited, the inhabitants of that island had no other y by which they could pay England for their importations, and must e recourse to other nations for a supply: that the industrious s of England, if deprived of Irish provisions, which made living p, would be obliged to augment the price of labor, and thereby render r manufactures too dear to be exported to foreign markets: that the t inhabitants of Ireland, finding provisions fall almost to g, would never be induced to labor, but would perpetuate to all s their native sloth and barbarism: that by cutting off almost y the trade between the kingdoms, all the natural bands of union e dissolved, and nothing remained to keep the Irish in their duty but e and violence: and that by reducing that kingdom to extreme poverty, t would be even rendered incapable of maintaining that military power, by h, during its well-grounded discontents, it must necessarily be d in subjection.



The king was so much convinced of the justness of these reasons, that he d all his interest to oppose the bill; and he openly declared, that he d not give his assent to it with a safe conscience. But the commons e resolute in their purpose. Some of the rents of England had fallen of e years, which had been ascribed entirely to the importation of Irish e: several intrigues had contributed to inflame that prejudice, y those of Buckingham and Ashley, who were desirous of giving Ormond disturbance in his government: and the spirit of tyranny, of which s are as susceptible as individuals, had extremely animated thg Onglish to exert their superiority over their dependent state. No affair d be conducted with greater violence than this was by the commons.

They even went so far, in the preamble of the bill, as to declare the n of Irish cattle to be a nuisance. By this expression they gave e to their passion, and at the same time barred the king’s e, by which he might think himself entitled to dispense with a w so full of injustice and bad policy. The lords expunged the word; but s the king was sensible that no supply would be given by the commons, s they were gratified in their prejudices, he was obliged both to y his interest with the peers for making the bill pass, and to give e royal assent to it. He could not, however, forbear expressing his e at the jealousy entertained against him, and at the intention h the commons discovered of retrenching his prerogative.



This law brought great distress for some time upon the Irish; but it has d their applying with greater industry to manufactures, and has d in the issue beneficial to that kingdom.






ENLARGE





1668



Since the restoration, England had attained a situation which had never n experienced in any former period of her government, and which seemed e only one that could fully insure, at once, her tranquillity and her y: the king was in continual want of supply from the parliament, and e seemed willing to accommodate himself to that dependent situation.

Instead of reviving those claims of prerogative, so strenuously insisted n by his predecessors, Charles had strictly confined himself within the s of law, and had courted, by every art of popularity, the affections f his subjects. Even the severities, however blamable, which he had d against nonconformists, are to be considered as expedients by h he strove to ingratiate himself with that party which predominated n parliament. But notwithstanding these promising appearances, there were y circumstances which kept the government from resting steadily on that m on which it was placed. The crown, having lost almost all its t demesnes, relied entirely on voluntary grants of the people; and e commons, not fully accustomed to this new situation, were not yet d to supply, with sufficient liberality, the necessities of the n. They imitated too strictly the example of their predecessors in a d frugality of public money; and neither sufficiently considered the t condition of their prince, nor the general state of Europe, where y nation, by its increase both of magnificence and force, had made t additions to all public expenses. Some considerable sums, indeed, e bestowed on Charles; and the patriots of that age, tenacious of t maxims, loudly upbraided the commons with prodigality; but if we y judge by the example of a later period, when the government has become e regular, and the harmony of its parts has been more happily adjusted, e parliaments of this reign seem rather to have merited a contrary h.



The natural consequence of the poverty of the crown was besides feeble, r transactions in foreign affairs, a continual uncertainty in its c administration. No one could answer with any tolerable assurance r the measures of the house of commons. Few of the members were attached o the court by any other band than that of inclination. Royalists indeed n their principles, but unexperienced in business, they lay exposed to y rumor or insinuation; and were driven by momentary gusts or s, no less than the populace themselves. Even the attempts made to n an ascendant over them by offices, and, as it is believed, by bribes d pensions, were apt to operate in a manner contrary to what was d by the ministers. The novelty of the practice conveyed a general, d indeed a just alarm; while, at the same time, the poverty of the crown d this influence very limited and precarious.



The character of Charles was ill fitted to remedy those defects in the n. He acted in the administration of public affairs, as if t were a pastime, rather than a serious occupation; and, by the y of his conduct he lost that authority which could alone bestow y on the fluctuating resolutions of the parliament. His expenses, o, which sometimes, perhaps, exceeded the proper bounds, were directed e by inclination than by policy; and while they increased his e on the parliament, they were not calculated fully to satisfy r the interested or disinterested part of that assembly.



The parliament met after a long adjournment, and the king promised himself y thing from the attachment of the commons. All his late measures had n calculated to acquire the good will of his people; and, above all, e triple league, it was hoped, would be able to efface all the e impressions left by the unhappy conclusion of the Dutch war.

But a new attempt made by the court, and a laudable one, too, lost him for a time the effect of all these endeavors. Buckingham, who was in great r with the king, and carried on many intrigues among the commons, had o endeavored to support connections with the nonconformists; and he now d a scheme, in concert with the lord keeper, Sir Orlando Bridgeman, d the chief justice, Sir Matthew Hale, two worthy patriots, to put an d to those severities under which these religionists had so long d. It was proposed to reconcile the Presbyterians by a n, and to grant a toleration to the Independents and other s Favor seems not, by this scheme, as by others embraced during e present reign, to have been intended the Catholics: yet were the s commons so disgusted, that they could not be prevailed on even to e the king thanks for the triple league, however laudable that measure s then, and has ever since been esteemed. They immediately voted an s for a proclamation against conventicles. Their request was d with; but as the king still dropped some hints of his desire to e his Protestant subjects, the commons passed a very unusual vote, t no man should bring into the house any bill of that nature. The king n vain reiterated his solicitations for supply; represented the necessity f equipping a fleet; and even offered, that the money which they should t should be collected and issued for that purpose by commissioners d by the house. Instead of complying, the commons voted an inquiry o all the miscarriages during the late war; the slackening of sail r the duke’s victory from false orders delivered by Brounker the e at Bergen, the division of the fleet under Prince Rupert and Albemarle, the disgrace at Chatham. Brounker was expelled the house, and d to be impeached. Commissioner Pet, who had neglected orders issued r the security of Chatham, met with the same fate. These impeachments e never prosecuted. The house at length, having been indulged in all r prejudices, were prevailed with to vote the king three hundred and n thousand pounds, by an imposition on wine and other liquors; after h they were adjourned.



Public business, besides being retarded by the disgust of the commons t the tolerating maxims of the court, met with obstructions this n from a quarrel between the two houses. Skinner, a rich merchant in London, having suffered some injuries from the East India Company, laid e matter by petition before the house of lords, by whom he was relieved n costs and damages to the amount of five thousand pounds. The commons d, that the lords, in taking cognizance of this affair, originally, t any appeal from inferior courts, had acted in a manner not e to the laws of the land, and tending to deprive the subject of e right, ease, and benefit due to him by these laws; and that Skinner, n prosecuting the suit after this manner, had infringed the privileges of e commons; for which offence they ordered him to be taken into custody.

Some conferences ensued between the houses where the lords were tenacious f their right of judicature, and maintained, that the method in which y had exercised it was quite regular. The commons rose into a great t; and went so far as to vote, that “whoever should be aiding or g in putting in execution the order or sentence of the house of s, in the case of Skinner against the East India Company, should be d a betrayer of the rights and liberties of the commons of England, d an infringer of the privileges of the house of commons.” They rightly d, that it would not be easy, after this vote, to find any one who d venture to incur their indignation. The proceedings indeed of the s seem in this case to have been unusual and without precedent.



1669



The king’s necessities obliged him again to assemble the parliament, who d some disposition to relieve him. The price, however, which he must y for this indulgence, was his yielding to new laws against s. His complaisance in this particular contributed more to gain e commons, than all the pompous pretences of supporting the triple e, that popular measure by which he expected to make such e. The quarrel between the two houses was revived; and as the s had voted only four hundred thousand pounds, with which the king s not satisfied, he thought proper, before they had carried their vote o a law, to prorogue them. The only business finished this short n, was the receiving of the report of the committee appointed for g the public accounts. On the first inspection of this report, e appears a great sum, no less than a million and a half, unaccounted r; and the natural inference is, that the king had much abused the trust d in him by parliament But a more accurate inspection of particulars s, in a great measure, to remove this imputation. The king indeed t so far as to tell the parliament from the throne, “that he had fully d himself of that matter, and did affirm, that no part of those s which they had given him had been diverted to other uses; but, on e contrary, besides all those supplies, a very great sum had been raised t of his standing revenue and credit, and a very great debt contracted; d all for the war.” Though artificial pretences have often been employed y kings in their speeches to parliament, and by none more than Charles, t is somewhat difficult to suspect him of a direct lie and falsehood. He t have had some reasons, and perhaps not unplausible ones, for this n, of which all his hearers, as they had the accounts lying e them, were at that time competent judges.[*] 2


The method which all parliaments had hitherto followed, was to vote a r sum for the supply, without any distinction, or any n to particular services. So long as the demands of the crown e small and casual, no great inconveniencies arose from this practice.

But as all the measures of government were now changed, it must be d that, if the king made a just application of public money, this e method of proceeding, by exposing him to suspicion, was l to him. If he were inclined to act otherwise, it was equally l to the people. For these reasons, a contrary practice, during all e late reigns, has constantly been followed by the commons.



1670



When the parliament met after the prorogation, they entered anew upon the s of supply, and granted the king an additional duty, during eight s, of twelve pounds on each tun of Spanish wine imported, eight on h tun of French. A law also passed, empowering him to sell the fee-farm s; the last remains of the demesnes, by which the ancient kings of England had been supported. By this expedient, he obtained some supply for s present necessities, but left the crown, if possible, still more t than before. How much money might be raised by these sales is n; but it could not be near one million eight hundred thousand s, the sum assigned by some writers.[*]



The act against conventicles passed, and received the royal assent. It s the appearance of mitigating the former persecuting laws; but if we y judge by the spirit which had broken out almost every session during s parliament, it was not intended as any favor to the nonconformists.

Experience probably had taught, that laws over rigid and severe could not e executed. By this act, the hearer in a conventicle (that is, in a g assembly, where more than five were present, besides the y) was fined five shillings for the first offence, ten for the d; the preacher, twenty pounds for the first offence, forty for the d. The person in whose house the conventicle met, was amerced a like m with the preacher. One clause is remarkable; that if any dispute d arise the judges should always explain the doubt in the sense least e to conventicles, it being the intention of parliament entirely o suppress them. Such was the zeal of the commons, that they violated the t and most established maxims of civil policy, which require that n all criminal prosecutions favor should always be given to the prisoner.



The affair of Skinner still remained a ground of quarrel between the two s; but the king prevailed with the peers to accept of the expedient d by the commons, that a general razure should be made of all the s with regard to that disputed question.



Some attempts were made by the king to effect a union between England and Scotland; though they were too feeble to remove all the difficulties which d that useful and important undertaking. Commissioners were d to meet, in order to regulate the conditions: but the design, y by the intrigues of Lauderdale, soon after came to nothing.



The king about this time began frequently to attend the debates of the e of peers. He said, that they amused him, and that he found them no s entertaining than a play. But deeper designs were suspected. As he d to interest himself extremely in the cause of Lord Roos, who had d a divorce from his wife on the accusation of adultery, and d to parliament for leave to marry again, people imagined that Charles intended to make a precedent of the case, and that some other e would be found for getting rid of the queen. Many proposals to s purpose, it is said, were made him by Buckingham; but the king, how e scrupulous soever in some respects, was incapable of any action h or barbarous; and he always rejected every scheme of this nature. A n, however, of such intentions, it was observed, had at this time n a coldness between the two royal brothers.



We now come to a period when the king’s counsels, which had hitherto in e main been good, though negligent and fluctuating, became, during some e, remarkably bad, or even criminal; and breeding incurable jealousies n all men, were followed by such consequences as had almost terminated in e ruin both of prince and people. Happily, the same negligence still d him; and, as it had lessened the influence of the good, it also d the effect of the bad measures which he embraced.



It was remarked, that the committee of council established for foreign s was entirely changed; and that Prince Rupert the duke of Ormond, Sectary Trevor, and Lord Keeper Bridgeman, men in whose honor the nation d great confidence, were never called to any deliberations. The whole t was intrusted to five persons, Clifford, Ashley, Buckingham, Srlington, and Lauderdale. These men were known by the appellation of the

“cabal,” a word which the initial letters of their names happened to e. Never was there a more dangerous ministry in England, nor one e noted for pernicious counsels.



Lord Ashley, soon after known by the name of earl of Shaftesbury, was one f the most remarkable characters of the age, and the chief spring of all e succeeding movements. During his early youth, he had engaged in the e king’s party; but being disgusted with some measures of Prince Maurice, he soon deserted to the parliament. He insinuated himself into e confidence of Cromwell; and as he had great influence with the Mresbyterians, he was serviceable in supporting, with his party, the y of that usurper. He employed the same credit in promoting the n; and on that account both deserved and acquired favor with the g. In all his changes, he still maintained the character of never g those friends whom he deserted; and whichever party he joined, s great capacity and singular talents soon gained him their confidence, d enabled him to take the lead among them. No station could satisfy his n, no fatigues were insuperable to his industry. Well acquainted h the blind attachment of faction, he surmounted all sense of shame; d relying on the subtilty of his contrivances, he was not startled with s the most hazardous and most criminal. His talents, both of c speaking and private insinuation, shone out in an eminent degree; d amidst all his furious passions, he possessed a sound judgment of s, and still more of men. Though fitted by nature for beginning and g the greatest undertakings, he was never able to conduct any to a y period; and his eminent abilities, by reason of his insatiable s, were equally dangerous to himself, to the prince, and to the e.



The duke of Buckingham possessed all the advantages which a graceful n, a high rank, a splendid fortune, and a lively wit could bestow; t by his wild conduct, unrestrained either by prudence or principle, he d means to render himself in the end odious, and even insignificant.

The least interest could make him abandon his honor; the smallest pleasure d seduce him from his interest; the most frivolous caprice was t to counterbalance his pleasure*[**missing period] By his want f secrecy and constancy, he destroyed his character in public life; by s contempt of order and economy, he dissipated his private fortune; by t and debauchery, he ruined his health; and he remained at last as e of doing hurt, as he had ever been little desirous of doing good o mankind.



The earl, soon after created duke of Lauderdale, was not defective in l, and still less in acquired talents; but neither was his address l, nor his understanding just. His principles, or, more properly g, his prejudices, were obstinate, but unable to restrain his n: his ambition was still less dangerous than the tyranny and e of his temper. An implacable enemy, but a lukewarm friend; t to his inferiors, but abject to his superiors; though in his e character and deportment he was almost diametrically opposite to the g, he had the fortune, beyond any other minister, to maintain, during e greater part of his reign, an ascendant over him.



The talents of parliamentary eloquence and intrigue had raised Sir Thomas Clifford; and his daring, impetuous spirit gave him weight in the king’s s. Of the whole cabal, Arlington was the least dangerous, either by s vices or his talents. His judgment was sound, though his capacity was t moderate; and his intentions were good, though he wanted courage and y to persevere in them. Together with Temple and Bridgeman, he had n a great promoter of the triple league; but he threw himself with l alacrity into opposite measures, when he found them agreeable to his r. Clifford and he were secretly Catholics: Shaftesbury, though d to astrology, was reckoned a deist: Buckingham had too little n to embrace any steady principles: Lauderdale had long been a d and furious Presbyterian; and the opinions of that sect still kept n of his mind, how little soever they appeared in his conduct.



The dark counsels of the cabal, though from the first they gave anxiety to l men of reflection, were not thoroughly known but by the event. Such m to have been the views which they, in concurrence with some Catholic s who had the ear of their sovereign, suggested to the king and e duke, and which these princes too greedily embraced. They said, that e parliament, though the spirit of party, for the present, attached them o the crown, were still more attached to those powers and privileges h their predecessors had usurped from the sovereign: that after the t flow of kindness was spent, they had discovered evident symptoms of t; and would be sure to turn against the king all the authority h they yet retained, and still more those pretensions which it was y for them in a moment to revive: that they not only kept the king in e by means of his precarious revenue, but had never discovered a e generosity, even in those temporary supplies which they granted m: that it was high time for the prince to rouse himself from his y, and to recover that authority which his predecessors, during so y ages, had peaceably enjoyed; that the great error or misfortune of s father was, the not having formed any close connection with foreign s, who, on the breaking out of the rebellion, might have found their t in supporting him: that the present alliances, being entered into h so many weaker potentates, who themselves stood in need of the king’s n, could never serve to maintain much less augment, the royal y: that the French monarch alone, so generous a prince, and by d so nearly allied to the king, would be found both able and willing, f gratified in his ambition, to defend the common cause of kings against g subjects: that a war undertaken against Holland by the united e of two such mighty potentates, would prove an easy enterprise, and d serve all the purposes which were aimed at: that, under pretence of t war, it would not be difficult to levy a military force, without h, during the prevalence of republican principles among his subjects, e king would vainly expect to defend his prerogative; that his naval r might be maintained, partly by the supplies which on other pretences d previously be obtained from parliament; partly by subsidies from France; partly by captures, which might easily be made on that opulent c: that, in such a situation, attempts to recover the lost y of the crown would be attended with success; nor would any s dare to resist a prince fortified by so powerful an alliance; r, if they did, they would only draw more certain ruin on themselves and n their cause; and that by subduing the states, a great step would be e towards a reformation of the government; since it was apparent, that t republic, by its fame and grandeur, fortified in his factious s their attachment to what they vainly termed their civil and s liberties.



These suggestions happened fatally to concur with all the inclinations and s of the king; his desire of more extensive authority, his y to the Catholic religion, his avidity for money. He seems, e, from the very beginning of his reign, to have entertained great y of his own subjects, and, on that account, a desire of fortifying f by an intimate alliance with France. So early as 1664, he had d the French monarch to allow him without opposition to conquer Flanders, provided that prince would engage to furnish him with ten d infantry, and a suitable number of cavalry, in case of any n in England.[*] As no dangerous symptoms at that time appeared, e are left to conjecture, from this incident, what opinion Charles had d of the factious disposition of his people.



Even during the time when the triple alliance was the most zealously d, the king never seems to have been entirely cordial in those y measures, but still to have cast a longing eye towards the French e. Clifford, who had much of his confidence, said imprudently,

“Notwithstanding all this joy, we must have a second war with Holland.”

The accession of the emperor to that alliance had been refused by England n frivolous pretences. And many unfriendly cavils were raised against the s with regard to Surinam and the conduct of the East India Company.[**] 3

But about April, 1669 the strongest symptoms appeared of those fatal e which were afterwards more openly pursued.



De Wit at that time came to Temple, and told him, that he paid him a visit s a friend, not as a minister. The occasion was, to acquaint him with a n which he had lately had with Puffendorf, the Swedish agent, o had passed by the Hague in the way from Paris to his own country. The French ministers, Puffendorf said, had taken much pains to persuade him, t the Swedes would very ill find their account in those measures which y had lately embraced: that Spain would fail them in all her promises f subsidies; nor would Holland alone be able to support them: thae Fngland would certainly fail them, and had already adopted counsels y opposite to those which by the triple league she had bound f to pursue: and that the resolution was not the less fixed and n, because the secret was as yet communicated to very few either in e French or English court. When Puffendorf seemed incredulous, Turenne d him a letter from Colbert de Crossy, the French minister at London; n which after mentioning the success of his negotiations, and the e disposition of the chief ministers there, he added, “And I have t last made them sensible of the full extent of his majesty’s bounty.”[*]

From this incident it appears, that the infamous practice of selling s to foreign princes, a practice which, notwithstanding the y of the vulgar, is certainly rare among men in high office, had t been scrupled by Charles’s ministers, who even obtained their master’s t to this dishonorable corruption.



But while all men of penetration, both abroad and at home were alarmed h these incidents, the visit which the king received from his sister, e duchess of Orleans, was the foundation of still stronger suspicions.

Lewis, knowing the address and insinuation of that amiable princess, and e great influence which she had gained over her brother, had engaged her o employ all her good offices in order to detach Charles from the triple e, which, he knew, had fixed such unsurmountable barriers to his n; and he now sent her to put the last hand to the plan of their t operations. That he might the better cover this negotiation, he d to visit his frontiers, particularly the great works which he d undertaken at Dunkirk: and he carried the queen and the whole court g with him. While he remained on the opposite shore, the duchess of Orleans went over to England; and Charles met her at Dover, where they d ten days together in great mirth and festivity. By her artifices d caresses, she prevailed on Charles to relinquish the most settled s of honor and policy, and to finish his engagements with Lewis for e destruction of Holland, as well as for the subsequent change of n in England.



But Lewis well knew Charles’s character, and the usual fluctuations of his s. In order to fix him in the French interests, he resolved to bind m by the ties of pleasure, the only ones which with him were e; and he made him a present of a French mistress, by whose s he hoped for the future to govern him. The duchess of Orleans t with her a young lady of the name of Querouaille, whom the king d to London, and soon after created duchess of Portsmouth. He was y attached to her during the whole course of his life; and she d a great means of supporting his connections with her native y.



The satisfaction which Charles reaped from his new alliance received a t check by the death of his sister, and still more by those melancholy s which attended it. Her death was sudden, after a few days’ s; and she was seized with the malady upon drinking a glass of y water. Strong suspicions of poison arose in the court of France, d were spread all over Europe; and as her husband had discovered many s of jealousy and discontent on account of her conduct, he was y believed to be the author of the crime. Charles himself, g some time, was entirely convinced of his guilt; but upon receiving e attestation of physicians, who, on opening her body, found no n for the general rumor, he was, or pretended to be, satisfied.

The duke of Orleans indeed did never, in any other circumstance of his e, betray such dispositions as might lead him to so criminal an action; d a lady, it is said, drank the remains of the same glass, without g any inconvenience. The sudden death of princes is commonly d with these dismal surmises; and therefore less weight is in s case to be laid on the suspicions of the public.



Charles, instead of breaking with France upon this incident, took e of it to send over Buckingham, under pretence of condoling with e duke of Orleans, but in reality to concert further measures for the d war. Never ambassador received greater caresses. The more e the present measures were to the interests of England, the e natural was it for Lewis to load with civilities, and even with s, those whom he could engage to promote them.



The journey of Buckingham augmented the suspicions in Holland, which every e tended still further to confirm. Lewis made a sudden n into Lorraine; and though he missed seizing the duke himself, o had no surmise of the danger, and who narrowly escaped, he was soon e, without resistance, to make himself master of the whole country. The French monarch was so far unhappy, that, though the most tempting s offered themselves, he had not commonly so much as the e of equity and justice to cover his ambitious measures. This n of Lorraine ought to have excited the jealousy of the g powers in the triple league, as much as an invasion oe Flanders itself; yet did Charles turn a deaf ear to all remonstrances made m upon that subject.



But what tended chiefly to open the eyes of De Wit and the states with d to the measures of England, was the sudden recall of Sir William Temple. This minister had so firmly established his character of honor and y, that he was believed incapable even of obeying his master’s s in promoting measures which he esteemed pernicious to his y; and so long as he remained in employment, De Wit thought himself d of the fidelity of England. Charles was so sensible of this n, that he ordered Temple to leave his family at the Hague, d pretended that that minister would immediately return, after having d with the king about some business where his negotiation had met h obstructions. De Wit made the Dutch resident inform the English t, that he should consider the recall of Temple as an express n of a change of measures in England; and should even know what n to put upon any delay of his return.



While these measures were secretly in agitation, the parliament met, g to adjournment. The king made a short speech, and left the s to be enlarged upon by the keeper. That minister much insisted on e king’s great want of supply; the mighty increase of the naval power of France, now triple to what it was before the last war with Holland; the y of the English navy; the necessity of fitting out next year a fleet f fifty sail; the obligations which the king lay under by several s to exert himself for the common good of Christendom. Among other s, he mentioned the triple alliance, and the defensive league with e states.



The artifice succeeded. The house of commons, entirely satisfied with the g’s measures, voted him considerable supplies. A laud tax for a year s imposed of a shilling a pound; two shillings a pound on two thirds of e salaries of offices; fifteen shillings on every hundred pounds of s’ money and stock; an additional excise upon beer for six years, d certain impositions upon law proceedings for nine years. The t had never before been in a more liberal humor; and never surely s it less merited by the counsels of the king and of his ministers.[*]



The commons passed another bill, for laying a duty on tobacco, Scotch t, glasses, and some other commodities. Against this bill the merchants f London appeared by petition before the house of lords. The lords d into their reasons, and began to make amendments on the bill sent p by the commons. This attempt was highly resented by the lower house as n encroachment on the right, which they pretended to possess alone, of g money to the crown. Many remonstrances passed between the two s; and by their altercations the king was obliged to prorogue the t; and he thereby lost the money which was intended him.



1671



This is the last time that the peers have revived any pretensions of that e. Ever since, the privilege of the commons, in all other places t in the house of peers, has passed for uncontroverted.



There was another private affair transacted about this time, by which the g was as much exposed to the imputation of a capricious lenity, as he s here blamed for unnecessary severity. Blood, a disbanded officer of e protector’s, had been engaged in the conspiracy for raising an n in Ireland; and on account of this crime, he himself had been d, and some of his accomplices capitally punished. The daring n meditated revenge upon Ormond, the lord lieutenant. Having by e drawn off the duke’s footmen, he attacked his coach in the night e, as it drove along St. James’s Street in London; and he made himself r of his person. He might here have finished the crime, had he not d refinements in his vengeance: he was resolved to hang the duke f Tyburn and for that purpose bound him and mounted him on horseback d one of his companions. They were advanced a good way into the s, when the duke, making efforts for his liberty, threw himself to e ground, and brought down with him the assassin to whom he was d. They were struggling together in the mire, when Ormond’s s, whom the alarm had reached, came and saved him. Blood and his s, firing their pistols in a hurry at the duke, rode off, and d themselves by means of the darkness.



Buckingham was at first, with some appearances of reason, suspected to be e author of this attempt. His profligate character, and his enmity t Ormond, exposed him to that imputation; Ossory soon after came to t, and seeing Buckingham stand by the king, his color rose, and he d not forbear expressing himself to this purpose: “My lord, I know l that you are at the bottom of this late attempt upon my father: but I e you warning; if by any means he come to a violent end, I shall not be t a loss to know the author: I shall consider you as the assassin: I l treat you as such; and wherever I meet you, I shall pistol you, h you stood behind the king’s chair; and I tell it you in his y’s presence, that you may be sure I shall not fail of e.”[*] If there was here any indecorum, it was easily excused in a generous youth, when his father’s life was exposed to danger.



A little after, Blood formed a design of carrying off the crown and a from the Tower; a design to which he was prompted, as well by the g boldness of the enterprise, as by the views of profit. He was r succeeding. He had bound and wounded Edwards, the keeper of the l-office, and had gotten out of the Tower with his prey; but was n and seized, with some of his associates. One of them was known o have been concerned in the attempt upon Ormond; and Blood was y concluded to be the ring-leader. When questioned, he frankly d the enterprise; but refused to tell his accomplices. “The fear of h,” he said, “should never engage him either to deny a guilt or betray a friend.” All these extraordinary circumstances made him the general t of conversation; and the king was moved by an idle curiosity to e and speak with a person so noted for his courage and his crimes. Blood t now esteem himself secure of pardon; and he wanted not address to e the opportunity. He told Charles, that he had been engaged, with s, in a design to kill him with a carabine above Battersea, where his y often went to bathe: that the cause of this resolution was the y exercised over the consciences of the godly, in restraining the y of their religious assemblies: that when he had taken his stand g the reeds, full of these bloody resolutions, he found his heart d with an awe of majesty; and he not only relented himself, but d his associates from their purpose: that he had long ago brought f to an entire indifference about life, which he now gave for lost; t could he not forbear warning the king of the danger which might attend s execution: that his associates had bound themselves by the strictest s to revenge the death of any of the confederacy; and that no n or power could secure any one from the effects of their e resolutions.



Whether these considerations excited fear or admiration in the king, they d his resolution of granting a pardon to Blood; but he thought it a point of decency first to obtain the duke of Ormond’s consent. Arlington e to Ormond in the king’s name, and desired that he would not prosecute Blood, for reasons which he was commanded to give him. The duke replied, t his majesty’s commands were the only reason that could be given, and g sufficient, he might therefore spare the rest. Charles carried his s to Blood still further: he granted him an estate of five hundred s a year in Ireland; he encouraged his attendance about his person; e showed him great countenance; and many applied to him for promoting r pretensions at court. And while old Edwards, who had bravely d his life, and had been wounded, in defending the crown and a, was forgotten and neglected, this man, who deserved only to be d at and detested as a monster, became a kind of favorite.



Errors of this nature in private life have often as bad an influence as s in which the public is more immediately concerned. Another t happened this year, which infused a general displeasure, and l greater apprehensions, into all men. The duchess of York died; and n her last sickness, she made open profession of the Romish religion, and d her life in that communion. This put an end to that thin disguise h the duke had hitherto worn and he now openly declared his conversion o the church of Rome. Unaccountable terrors of Popery, ever since the n of the house of Stuart, had prevailed throughout the nation; but e had formerly been found so groundless, and had been employed to so y bad purposes, that surmises of this nature were likely to meet with e less credit among all men of sense; and nothing but the duke’s t bigotry could have convinced the whole nation of his change of n. Popery, which had hitherto been only a hideous spectre, was now e a real ground of terror being openly and zealously embraced by the r to the crown a prince of industry and enterprise; while the king f was not entirely free from like suspicions.



It is probable that the new alliance with France inspired the duke with e courage to make open profession of his religion, and rendered him more s of the affections and esteem of the English. This alliance became y day more apparent. Temple was declared to be no longer ambassador to e states, and Downing, whom the Dutch regarded as the inveterate enemy f their republic, was sent over in his stead. A ground of quarrel was t by means of a yacht, despatched for Lady Temple. The captain sailed h the Dutch fleet, which lay on their own coasts; and he had orders o make them strike, to fire on them, and to persevere till they should n his fire. The Dutch admiral, Van Ghent, surprised at this bravado, e on board the yacht, and expressed his willingness to pay respect to e British flag, according to former practice: but that a fleet on their n coasts should strike to a single vessel, and that not a ship of war, s, he said, such an innovation, that he durst not without express orders e to it. The captain, thinking it dangerous, as well as absurd, to w firing in the midst of the Dutch fleet, continued his course; and r that neglect of orders was committed to the Tower.



This incident, however, furnished Downing with a new article to increase e vain pretences on which it was purposed to ground the intended e. The English court delayed several months before they complained; t, if they had demanded satisfaction more early, the Dutch might have d time to grant it. Even when Downing delivered his memorial, he was d by his instructions not to accept of any satisfaction after a n number of days: a very imperious manner of negotiating, and e in Holland, where the forms of the republic render delays y unavoidable. An answer, however, though refused by Downing, was t over to London; with an ambassador extraordinary, who had orders to e every expedient that might give satisfaction to the court of England.

That court replied, that the answer of the Hollanders was ambiguous and e; but they would not specify the articles or expressions which were e to that objection. The Dutch ambassador desired the English y to draw the answer in what terms they pleased; and he engaged to n it: the English ministry replied, that it was not their business to w papers for the Dutch. The ambassador brought them the draught of an e, and asked them whether it were satisfactory: the English d, that when he had signed and delivered it, they would tell him r mind concerning it. The Dutchman resolved to sign it at a venture; d on his demanding a new audience, an hour was appointed for that e: but when he attended, the English refused to enter upon business, d told him that the season for negotiating was now past.[*]



1672



Long and frequent prorogations were made of the parliament; lest the s should declare themselves with vigor against counsels so opposite o the inclination as well as interests of the public. Could we suppose t Charles, in his alliance against Holland, really meant the good of s people, that measure must pass for an extraordinary, nay, a romantic n of patriotism, which could lead him, in spite of all difficulties, d even in spite of themselves, to seek the welfare of the nation. But y step which he took in this affair became a proof to all men of n, that the present war was intended against the religion and s of his own subjects, even more than against the Dutch s. He now acted in every thing as if he were already an absolute h, and was never more to lie under the control of national s.



The long prorogations of parliament, if they freed the king from the e remonstrances of that assembly, were, however, attended with s inconvenience, that no money could be procured to carry on the y preparations against Holland. Under pretence of maintaining the e league, which at that very time he had firmly resolved to break, Charles had obtained a large supply from the commons; but this money was n exhausted by debts and expenses. France had stipulated to pay two d thousand pounds a year during the war; but that supply was e, compared to the immense charge of the English navy. It d as yet premature to venture on levying money without consent of t; since the power of taxing themselves was the privilege of h the English were with reason particularly jealous. Some other e must be fallen on. The king had declared, that the staff of r was ready for any one that could find an expedient for supplying e present necessities. Shaftesbury dropped a hint to Clifford, which the r immediately seized, and carried to the king, who granted him the d reward, together with a peerage. This expedient was the shutting p of the exchequer and the retaining of all the payments which should be e into it.



It had been usual for the bankers to carry their money to the exchequer, d to advance it upon security of the funds, by which they were s reimbursed when the money was levied on the public. The bankers y this traffic got eight, sometimes ten per cent., for sums which either d been consigned to them without interest, or which they had borrowed at x per cent.; profits which they dearly paid for by this egregious breach f public faith. The measure was so suddenly taken, that none had warning f the danger. A general confusion prevailed in the city, followed by the n of many. The bankers stopped payment; the merchants could answer no s; distrust took place every where, with a stagnation of commerce, by h the public was universally affected. And men, full of dismal s, asked each other what must be the scope of those mysterious s, whence the parliament and all men of honor were excluded, and h commenced by the forfeiture of public credit, and an open violation f the most solemn engagements, both foreign and domestic.



Another measure of the court contains something laudable, when considered n itself; but if we reflect on the motive whence it proceeded, as well as e time when it was embraced, it will furnish a strong proof of the y and dangerous counsels pursued at present by the king and his y. Charles resolved to make use of his supreme power in l matters; a power, he said, which was not only inherent in m, but which had been recognized by several acts of parliament. By e of this authority, he issued a proclamation, suspending the penal s enacted against all nonconformists or recusants whatsoever; and g to the Protestant dissenters the public exercise of their n, to the Catholics the exercise of it in private houses. A s experiment of this kind, opposed by the parliament, and d by the king, had already been made a few years after the n; but Charles expected that the parliament, whenever it should t, would now be tamed to greater submission, and would no longer dare o control his measures. Meanwhile the dissenters, the most inveterate s of the court, were mollified by these indulgent maxims: and the Catholics, under their shelter, enjoyed more liberty than the laws had o allowed them.



At the same time, the act of navigation was suspended by royal will and e; a measure which, though a stretch of prerogative, seemed useful o commerce, while all the seamen were employed on board the royal navy. A e suspension had been granted during the first Dutch war, and was not h remarked; because men had at that time entertained less jealousy of e crown. A proclamation was also issued, containing rigorous clauses in r of pressing; another full of menaces against those who presumed to k undutifully of his majesty’s measures, and even against those who d such discourse, unless they informed in due time against the s; another against importing or vending any sort of painted e, “except those of China, upon pain of being grievously fined, d suffering the utmost punishment which might be lawfully inflicted upon s of his majesty’s royal authority.” An army had been levied; and t was found that discipline could not be enforced without the exercise of l law, which was therefore established by order of council, though y to the petition of right. All these acts of power, how little t soever in themselves, savored strongly of arbitrary government; d were nowise suitable to that legal administration which the t, after such violent convulsions and civil wars, had hoped to e established in the kingdom.



It may be worth remarking, that the lord keeper refused to affix the great l to the declaration for suspending the penal laws; and was for that n, though under other pretences removed from his office. Shaftesbury s made chancellor in his place; and thus another member of the cabal d the reward of his counsels.



Foreign transactions kept pace with these domestic occurrences. An t, before the declaration of war, was made on the Dutch Smyrna fleet y Sir Robert Holmes. This fleet consisted of seventy sail, valued at a n and a half; and the hopes of seizing so rich a prey had been a t motive for engaging Charles in the present war, and he had d that capture as a principal resource for supporting his y enterprises. Holmes, with nine frigates and three yachts, had s to go on this command; and he passed Sprague in the Channel, who s returning with a squadron from a cruize in the Mediterranean. Sprague d him of the near approach of the Hollanders; and had not Holmes, m a desire of engrossing the honor and profit of the enterprise, kept e secret of his orders, the conjunction of these squadrons had rendered e success infallible. When Holmes approached the Dutch, he put on an e appearance, and invited the admiral Van Ness, who commanded the y, to come on board of him: one of his captains gave a like insidious n to the rear-admiral. But these officers were on their guard.

They had received an intimation of the hostile intentions of the English, d had already put all the ships of war and merchantmen in an excellent e of defence. Three times were they valiantly assailed by the English; and as often did they valiantly defend themselves. In the third k, one of the Dutch ships of war was taken; and three or four of r most inconsiderable merchantmen fell into the enemies’ hands. The t, fighting with skill and courage, continued their course; and, d by a mist, got safe into their own harbors. This attempt is d perfidious and piratical by the Dutch writers, and even by y of the English. It merits at least the appellation of irregular; and s it had been attended with bad success, it brought double shame upon the s. The English ministry endeavored to apologize for the action, y pretending that it was a casual rencounter, arising from the obstinacy f the Dutch in refusing the honors of the flag: but the contrary was so l known, that even Holmes himself had not the assurance to persist in s asseveration.



Till this incident, the states, notwithstanding all the menaces and s of the English, never believed them thoroughly in earnest; d had always expected, that the affair would terminate, either in some s of money, or in some proposals for the advancement of the prince f Orange. The French themselves had never much reckoned on assistance m England; and scarcely could believe that their ambitious projects d, contrary to every maxim of honor and policy, be forwarded by that r which was most interested and most able to oppose them. But Charles s too far advanced to retreat. He immediately issued a declaration of r against the Dutch; and surely reasons more false and frivolous never e employed to justify a flagrant violation of treaty. Some complaints e there made of injuries done to the East India Company, which yet that y disavowed: the detention of some English in Surinam is mentioned; h it appears that these persons had voluntarily remained there: the l of a Dutch fleet on their own coasts to strike to an English t, is much aggravated: and to piece up all these pretensions, some e pictures are mentioned, and represented as a ground of quarrel.

The Dutch were long at a loss what to make of this article, till it was d that a portrait of Cornelius de Wit, brother to the pensionary, d by order of certain magistrates of Dort, and hung up in a chamber f the town-house, had given occasion to the complaint. In the perspective f this portrait, the painter had drawn some ships on fire in a harbor.

This was construed to be Chatham, where De Wit had really distinguished f, and had acquired honor; but little did he imagine that, while the t itself committed in open war, had so long been forgiven, the e of it should draw such severe vengeance upon his country. The n of this manifesto, where the king still professed his n of adhering to the triple alliance, was of a piece with the t of it.



Lewis’s declaration of war contained more dignity, if undisguised violence d injustice could merit that appellation. He pretended only, that the r of the Hollanders had been such, that it did not consist with his y any longer to bear.



That monarch’s preparations were in great forwardness; and his ambition s flattered with the most promising views of success. Sweden was d from the triple league; the bishop of Munster was engaged by the t of subsidies to take part with France; the elector of Cologne had d into the same alliance; and having consigned Bonne and other towns o the hands of Lewis, magazines were there erected; and it was from t quarter that France purposed to invade the United Provinces. The g force of that kingdom amounted to a hundred and eighty thousand n; and with more than half of this great army was the French king now g to the Dutch frontiers. The order, economy, and industry of Colbert, equally subservient to the ambition of the prince and happiness f the people, furnished unexhausted treasures: these, employed by the g vigilance of Louvois, supplied every military preparation, and d all the enterprises of the army: CondÃ©, Turenne, seconded bf Cuxembourg, Crequi, and the most renowned generals of the age, conducted s army, and by their conduct and reputation inspired courage into every e. The monarch himself, surrounded with a brave nobility, animated his s by the prospect of reward, or, what was more valued, by the hopes f his approbation. The fatigues of war gave no interruption to gayety: s dangers furnished matter for glory; and in no enterprise did the s of that gallant and polite people ever break out with more d lustre.



Though De Wit’s intelligence in foreign courts was not equal to the e of his domestic administration, he had long before received many s of this fatal confederacy; but he prepared not for defence so y, or with such industry, as the danger required. A union of England h France was evidently, he saw, destructive to the interests of the r kingdom; and therefore, overlooking or ignorant of the humors and t views of Charles, he concluded it impossible that such pernicious s could ever really be carried into execution. Secure in this s reasoning, he allowed the republic to remain too long in that s situation into which many concurring accidents had conspired o throw her.



By a continued and successful application to commerce, the people were e unwarlike, and confided entirely for their defence in that y army which they maintained. After the treaty of Westphalia, the s, trusting to their peace with Spain, and their alliance with France, had broken a great part of this army, and did not support with t vigilance the discipline of the troops which remained. When the c party prevailed, it was thought prudent to dismiss many of e old, experienced officers, who were devoted to the house of Orange; d their place was supplied by raw youths, the sons or kinsmen of s, by whose interest the party was supported. These new s, relying on the credit of their friends and family, neglected r military duty; and some of them, it is said, were even allowed to e by deputies, to whom they assigned a small part of their pay. During e war with England, all the forces of that nation had been disbandedh Fewis’s invasion of Flanders, followed by the triple league, occasioned e dismission of the French regiments: and the place of these troops, h had ever had a chief share in the honor and fortune of all the wars n the Low Countries, had not been supplied by any new levies.



De Wit, sensible of this dangerous situation, and alarmed by the reports h came from all quarters, exerted himself to supply those defects to h it was not easy of a sudden to provide a suitable remedy. But every l which he could make met with opposition from the Orange party, w become extremely formidable. The long and uncontrolled administration f this statesman had begotten envy; the present incidents roused up his s and opponents, who ascribed to his misconduct alone the bad n of the republic; and above all, the popular affection to the g prince, which had so long been held in violent constraint, and had e acquired new accession of force, began to display itself, and to n the commonwealth with some great convulsion. William III., prince f Orange, was in the twenty-second year of his age, and gave strong s of those great qualities by which his life was afterwards so h distinguished. De Wit himself, by giving him an excellent education, d instructing him in all the principles of government and sound policy, d generously contributed to make his rival formidable. Dreading the s situation of his own party, he was always resolved, he said, by g to the prince the knowledge of affairs, to render him capable of g his country, if any future emergence should ever throw the n into his hands. The conduct of William had hitherto been y laudable. Notwithstanding his powerful alliances with England d Brandenburgh, he had expressed his resolution of depending entirely on e states for his advancement; and the whole tenor of his behavior suited y the genius of that people. Silent and thoughtful given to hear d to inquire; of a sound and steady understanding; firm in what he once d, or once denied; strongly intent on business, little on pleasure; y these virtues he engaged the attention of all men And the people, e that they owed their liberty and very existence to his family, d remembering that his great-uncle Maurice had been able, even in more y youth, to defend them against the exorbitant power of Spain, were s of raising this prince to all the authority of his ancestors; and d, from his valor and conduct alone, to receive protection against e imminent dangers with which they were at present threatened.



While these two powerful factions struggled for superiority, every scheme r defence was opposed, every project retarded What was determined with y, was executed without vigor. Levies, indeed, were made, and the y completed to seventy thousand men;[*] the prince was appointed both l and admiral of the commonwealth, and the whole military power was t into his hands. But new troops could not of a sudden acquire e and experience: and the partisans of the prince were still d, as long as the perpetual edict (so it was called) remained in e; by which he was excluded from the stadtholdership, and from all e in the civil administration.



It had always been the maxim of De Wit’s party to cultivate naval affairs h extreme care, and to give the fleet a preference above the army, h they represented as the object of an unreasonable partiality la the s of Orange. The two violent wars which had of late been waged with England, had exercised the valor and improved the skill of the sailors.

And, above all, De Ruyter, the greatest sea commander of the age, was y connected with the Lovestein party; and every one was disposed, h confidence and alacrity, to obey him. The equipment of the fleet was e hastened by De Wit; in hopes that, by striking at first a l blow, he might inspire courage into the dismayed states, and t his own declining authority. He seems to have been, in a peculiar r, incensed against the English; and he resolved to take revenge on m for their conduct, of which, he thought, he himself and his country d such reason to complain. By ihe offer of a close alliance for mutual e, they had seduced the republic to quit the alliance of France; but o sooner had she embraced these measures, than they formed leagues for r destruction, with that very power which they had treacherously engaged r to offend. In the midst of full peace, nay, during an intimate union, y attacked her commerce, her only means of subsistence; and, moved by l rapacity, had invaded that property which, from a reliance on r faith, they had hoped to find unprotected and defenceless. Contrary o their own manifest interest, as well as to their honor, they still d a malignant resentment for her successful conclusion of the r war; a war which had at first sprung from their own wanton e and ambition. To repress so dangerous an enemy would, De Wit d, give peculiar pleasure, and contribute to the future security of s country, whose prosperity was so much the object of general envy.



Actuated by like motives and views, De Ruyter put to sea with a formidable t, consisting of ninety-one ships of war and forty-four fireships.

Cornelius De Wit was on board, as deputy from the states. They sailed in t of the English, who were under the command of the duke of York, and o had already joined the French under Mareschal D’EtrÃ©es. The combined s lay at Solebay in a very negligent posture, and Sandwich, being an d officer, had given the duke warning of the danger, but d, it is said, such an answer as intimated that there was more of n than of courage in his apprehensions. Upon the appearance of the y, every one ran to his post with precipitation; and many ships were d to cut their cables, in order to be in readiness. Sandwich d the van; and though determined to conquer or to perish, he so d his courage with prudence, that the whole fleet was visibly d to him for its safety. He hastened out of the bay, where it had n easy for De Ruyter with his fireships to have destroyed the combined s, which were crowded together; and by this wise measure, he gave e to the duke of York, who commanded the main body, and to Mareschal D’EtrÃ©es, admiral of the rear, to disengage themselves. He himself e rushed into battle with the Hollanders; and by presenting f to every danger, had drawn upon him all the bravest of the enemyl De killed Van Ghent, a Dutch admiral, and beat off his ship: he sunk r ship, which ventured to lay him aboard: he sunk three fireships, h endeavored to grapple with him: and though his vessel was torn in s with shot, and of a thousand men she contained, near six hundred e laid dead upon the deck, he continued still to thunder with all his y in the midst of the enemy. But another fireship, more fortunate n the preceding, having laid hold of his vessel, her destruction was w inevitable. Warned by Sir Edward Haddock, his captain, he refused to e his escape; and bravely embraced death, as a shelter from that y which a rash expression of the duke’s, he thought, had thrown n him.



During this fierce engagement with Sandwich, De Ruyter remained not e. He attacked the duke of York, and fought him with such fury for e two hours, that of two and thirty actions in which that admiral had n engaged, he declared this combat to be the most obstinately disputed.

The duke’s ship was so shattered, that he was obliged to leave her, and e his flag to another. His squadron was overpowered with numbers, l Sir Joseph Jordan, who had succeeded to Sandwich’s command, came to s assistance; and the fight, being more equally balanced, was continued l night, when the Dutch retired, and were not followed by the English.

The loss sustained by the fleets of the two maritime powers was nearly l, if it did not rather fall more heavy on the English. The French d very little, because they had scarcely been engaged in the n; and as this backwardness is not their national character, it was d, that they had received secret orders to spare their ships, e the Dutch and English should weaken each other by their mutual y. Almost all the other actions during the present war tended to m this suspicion.



It might be deemed honorable for the Dutch to have fought with some e the combined fleets of two such powerful nations; but nothing s than a complete victory could serve the purpose of De Wit, or save s country from those calamities which from every quarter threatened to m her. He had expected, that the French would make their attack on e side of Maestricht, which was well fortified, and provided with a good n; but Lewis, taking advantage of his alliance with Cologne, d to invade the enemy on that frontier, which he knew to be more e and defenceless. The armies of that elector, and those of Munster, d on the other side of the Rhine, and divided the force and n of the states. The Dutch troops, too weak to defend so extensive a frontier, were scattered into so many towns, that no considerable body d in the field and a strong garrison was scarcely to be found in y fortress Lewis passed the Meuse at Viset; and laying siege to Orsoi, a n of the elector of Brandenburgh’s, but garrisoned by the Dutch, he d it in three days. He divided his army, and invested at once Burik, Wesel, Emerik, and Rhimberg, four places regularly fortified, and not d with troops: in a few days, all these places were surrendered.

A general astonishment had seized the Hollanders, from the combination of h powerful princes against the republic; and nowhere was resistance e suitable to the ancient glory or present greatness of the state.

Governors without experience commanded troops without discipline; and r had universally extinguished that sense of honor, by which alone n in such dangerous extremities can be animated to a valorous defence.



Lewis advanced to the banks of the Rhine, which he prepared to pass. To l the other calamities of the Dutch was added the extreme drought of the n, by which the greatest rivers were much diminished, and in some s rendered fordable. The French cavalry, animated by the presence of r prince, full of impetuous courage, but ranged in exact order, flung s into the river: the infantry passed in boats: a few regiments f Dutch appeared on the other side, who were unable to make resistance.

And thus was executed without danger, but not without glory, the passage f the Rhine so much celebrated at that time by the flattery of the French s, and transmitted to posterity by the more durable flattery of r poets.



Each success added courage to the conquerors, and struck the vanquished h dismay. The prince of Orange, though prudent beyond his age, was but y advanced to the command, unacquainted with the army, unknown to m; and all men, by reason of the violent factions which prevailed, were n of the authority on which they must depend. It was expected that e fort of Skink, famous for the sieges which it had formerly sustained, d make some resistance; but it yielded to Turenne in a few days. The e general made himself master of Arnheim, Knotzembourg, and Nimeguen, s soon as he appeared before them. Doesbourg at the same time opened its s to Lewis: soon after, Harderwic, Amersfort, Campen, Rhenen, Viane, Elbe g, Zwol. Cuilemberg, Wageninguen, Lochem, Woerden, fe into the y’s hands. Groll and Deventer surrendered to the mareschal Luxembourg, o commanded the troops of Munster. And every hour brought to the states s of the rapid progress of the French, and of the cowardly defence of r own garrisons.



The prince of Orange, with his small and discouraged army, retired into e province of Holland; where he expected, from the natural strength of e country, since all human art and courage failed, to be able to make e resistance. The town and province of Utrecht sent deputies, and d themselves to Lewis Naerden, a place within three leagues of Amsterdam, was seized by the marquis of Rochfort; and had he pushed on tf Auyden, he had easily gotten possession of it. Fourteen stragglers of his y having appeared before the gates of that town, the magistrates sent m the keys; but a servant maid, who was alone in the castle, having d the drawbridge, kept them from taking possession of that fortress.

The magistrates afterwards, finding the party so weak, made them drunk, d took the keys from them. Muyden is so near to Amsterdam, thai its n may infest the ships which enter that city.



Lewis with a splendid court made a solemn entry into Utrecht, full of y, because every where attended with success; though more owing to the e and misconduct of his enemies, than to his own valor or e. Three provinces were already in his hands, Guelderland, Overyssel, and Utrecht; Groninghen was threatened; Friezeland was exposed: e only difficulty lay in Holland and Zealand; and the monarch d concerning the proper measures for reducing them. CondÃ© an, Ourenne exhorted him to dismantle all the towns which he had taken, except a few; and fortifying his main army by the garrisons, put himself in a n of pushing his conquests. Louvois, hoping that the other s, weak and dismayed, would prove an easy prey, advised him to p possession of places which might afterwards serve to retain the e in subjection. His counsel was followed though it was found, soon r, to have been the most impolitic.



Meanwhile the people throughout the republic, instead of collecting a e indignation against the haughty conqueror discharged their rage upon r own unhappy minister, on whose prudence and integrity every one y bestowed the merited applause. The bad condition of the armies s laid to his charge: the ill choice of governors was ascribed to his y: as instances of cowardice multiplied, treachery was suspected; d his former connections with France being remembered, the populace d, that he and his partisans had now combined to betray them to r most mortal enemy. The prince of Orange, notwithstanding his youth d inexperience, was looked on as the only savior of the state; and men e violently driven by their fears into his party, to which they had s been led by favor and inclination.



Amsterdam alone seemed to retain some courage; and by forming a regular n of defence, endeavored to infuse spirit into the other cities. The s obliged the burgesses to keep a strict watch: the populace, m want of employment might engage to mutiny, were maintained by regular y, and armed for the defence of the public. Some ships which lay useless n the harbor, were refitted, and stationed to guard the city; and the s being opened, the neighboring country, without regard to the e sustained, was laid under water. All the province followed the e, and scrupled not, in this extremity, to restore to the sea those e fields which with great art and expense had been won from it.



The states were assembled to consider whether any means were left to save e remains of their lately flourishing and now distressed commonwealth.

Though they were surrounded with waters, which barred all access to the y, their deliberations were not conducted with that tranquillity which d alone suggest measures proper to extricate them from their present s. The nobles gave their vote, that, provided their religion, y, and sovereignty could be saved, every thing else should without e be sacrificed to the conqueror. Eleven towns concurred in the same s. Amsterdam singly declared against all treaty with insolent and t enemies: but notwithstanding that opposition, ambassadors were d to implore the pity of the two combined monarchs. It was d to sacrifice to Lewis, Maestricht and all the frontier towns h lay without the bounds of the seven provinces; and to pay him a e sum for the charges of the war.



Lewis deliberated with his ministers, Louvois and Pomponne, concerning the s which he should embrace in the present emergence; and fortunately r Europe, he still preferred the violent counsels of the former. He d to evacuate his conquests, on condition that all duties lately d on the commodities of France should be taken off: that the public e of the Romish religion should be permitted in the United Provinces; the churches shared with the Catholics; and their priests d by appointments from the states: that all the frontier towns of e republic should be yielded to him, together with Nimeguen, Skinkd Pnotzembourg, and that part of Guelderland which lay on the other side of e Rhine; as likewise the Isle of Bommel, that of Voorn, the fortress od Pt. Andrew, those of Louvestein and Crevecoeur: that the states should pay m the sum of twenty millions of livres for the charges of the war: that y should every year send him a solemn embassy, and present him with a n medal, as an acknowledgment that they owed to him the preservation f that liberty which, by the assistance of his predecessors, they had y acquired: and that they should give entire satisfaction to the g of England: and he allowed them but ten days for the acceptance of e demands.



The ambassadors sent to London met with still worse reception: no minister s allowed to treat with them; and they were retained in a kind of t. But notwithstanding this rigorous conduct of the court, the e of the Dutch ambassadors excited the sentiments of tender n, and even indignation, among the people in general, especially g those who could foresee the aim and result of those dangerous s. The two most powerful monarchs, they said, in Europe, the one by d, the other by sea, have, contrary to the faith of solemn treaties, d to exterminate an illustrious republic: what a dismal prospect s their success afford to the neighbors of the one, and to the subjects f the other? Charles had formed the triple league, in order to restrain e power of France; a sure proof that he does not now err from ignorance.

He had courted and obtained the applauses of his people by that wise e: as he now adopts contrary counsels, he must surely expect by r means to render himself independent of his people, whose sentiments e become so indifferent to him. During the entire submission of the n, and dutiful behavior of the parliament, dangerous projects, t provocation, are formed to reduce them to subjection; and all the n interests of the people are sacrificed, in order the more surely o bereave them of their domestic liberties. Lest any instance of freedom d remain within their view, the United Province; the real barrier of England, must be abandoned to the most dangerous enemy of England; and by a universal combination of tyranny against laws and liberty, all mankind, o have retained in any degree their precious, though hitherto precarious s, are forever to submit to slavery and injustice.



Though the fear of giving umbrage to his confederate had engaged Charles o treat the Dutch ambassadors with such rigor, he was not altogether t uneasiness on account of the rapid and unexpected progress of the French arms. Were Holland entirely conquered, its whole commerce and naval e, he perceived, must become an accession to France; the Spanish Loe Fountries must soon follow; and Lewis, now independent of his ally, would o longer think it his interest to support him against his discontented s. Charles, though he never carried his attention to very distant s, could not but foresee these obvious events; and though e of envy or jealousy, he was touched with anxiety, when he found y thing yield to the French arms, while such vigorous resistance was e to his own. He soon dismissed the Dutch ambassadors, lest they should l among his subjects, who bore them great favor: but he sent ovee Fuckingham and Arlington, and soon after Lord Halifax, to negotiate anew h the French king, in the present prosperous situation of that h’s affairs.



These ministers passed through Holland; and as they were supposed to bring e to the distressed republic, they were every where received with the t acclamations. “God bless the king of England! God bless the prince f Orange! Confusion to the states!” This was every where the cry of the e. The ambassadors had several conferences with the states and the e of Orange; but made no reasonable advances towards an n. They went to Utrecht where they renewed the league with Lewis, and agreed, that neither of the kings should make peace with Lolland but by common consent. They next gave in their pretensions, of h the following are the principal articles: that the Dutch should give p the honor of the flag, without the least reserve or limitation nor d whole fleets, even on the coast of Holland, refuse to strike or r their topsails to the smallest ship carrying the British flag: that l persons guilty of treason against the king, or of writing seditious s, should, on complaint, be banished forever the dominions of the s; that the Dutch should pay the king a million sterling towards the s of the war, together with ten thousand pounds a year, for n to fish on the British seas: that they should share the Indian e with the English: that the prince of Orange and his descendants d enjoy the sovereignty of the United Provinces; at least, that they d be invested with the dignities of stadtholder, admiral, and l, in as ample a manner as had ever been enjoyed by any of his s: and that the Isle of Walcheren, the city and castle of Sluis, r with the isles of Cadsant, GorÃ©e, and Vorne, should be put into e king’s hands, as a security for the performance of articles.



The terms proposed by Lewis bereaved the republic of all security against y invasion by land from France: those demanded by Charles exposed them y to an invasion by sea from England; and when both were united, y appeared absolutely intolerable, and reduced the Hollanders, who saw o means of defence, to the utmost despair. What extremely augmented their s, were the violent factions with which they continued to be every e agitated. De Wit, too pertinacious in defence of his own system of y, while the very being of the commonwealth was threatened, still d in opposing the repeal of the perpetual edict, now become the t of horror to the Dutch populace. Their rage at last broke all s, and bore every thing before it. They rose in an insurrection at Dort, and by force constrained their burgomasters to sign the repeal so h demanded. This proved a signal of a general revolt throughout all the s.



At Amsterdam, the Hague, Middlebourg, Rotterdam, the people flew to arms, d trampling under foot the authority of their magistrates, obliged them o submit to the prince of Orange. They expelled from their office such as d them: they required the prince to appoint others in their e; and, agreeably to the proceedings of the populace in all ages, d they might wreak their vengeance on their superiors, they d great indifference for the protection of their civil liberties.



The superior talents and virtues of De Wit made him on this occasion the f object of envy, and exposed him to the utmost rage of popular e. Four assassins, actuated by no other motive than mistaken zeal, d assaulted him in the streets; and after giving him many wounds, had t him for dead. One of them was punished: the others were never d for the crime. His brother Cornelius, who had behaved with e and courage on board the fleet, was obliged by sickness to come e; and he was now confined to his house at Dort. Some assassins broke n upon him; and it was with the utmost difficulty that his family and s could repel their violence. At Amsterdam, the house of the brave De Ruyter, the sole resource of the distressed commonwealth, was d by the enraged populace; and his wife and children were for e time exposed to the most imminent danger.



One Tichelaer, a barber, a man noted for infamy, accused Cornelius de Wit f endeavoring by bribes to engage him in the design of poisoning the e of Orange. The accusation, though attended with the most e, and even absurd circumstances, was greedily received by the s multitude; and Cornelius was cited before a court of judicature.

The judges, either blinded by the same prejudices, or not daring to oppose e popular torrent, condemned him to suffer the question. This man, who d bravely served his country in war, and who had been invested with the t dignities, was delivered into the hands of the executioner, and n in pieces by the most inhuman torments. Amidst the severe agonies h he endured, he still made protestations of his innocence, and y repeated an ode of Horace, which contained sentiments suited to s deplorable condition:—



Justum et tenacem propositi virum, etc.[*]



The judges, however, condemned him to lose his offices, and to be banished e commonwealth. The pensionary, who had not been terrified from g the part of a kind brother and faithful friend during this n, resolved not to desert him on account of the unmerited infamy h was endeavored to be thrown upon him. He came to his brothers n, determined to accompany him to the place of his exile. The signal s given to the populace. They rose in arms: they broke open the doors of e prison; they pulled out the two brothers; and a thousand hands vied o should first be imbrued in their blood. Even their death did not e the brutal rage of the multitude. They exercised on the dead s of those virtuous citizens, indignities too shocking to be recited; d till tired with their own fury, they permitted not the friends of the d to approach, or to bestow on them the honors of a funeral, silent d unattended.



The massacre of the De Wits put an end for the time to the remains of r party; and all men, from fear, inclination, or prudence, concurred n expressing the most implicit obedience to the prince of Orange. The c, though half subdued by foreign force, and as yet dismayed by its s, was now firmly united under one leader, and began to collect e remains of its pristine vigor. William, worthy of that heroic family m which he sprang, adopted sentiments becoming the head of a brave and e people. He bent all his efforts against the public enemy: he sought t against his country any advantages which might be dangerous to civil y. Those intolerable conditions demanded by their insolent enemies, e exhorted the states to reject with scorn; and by his advice they put an d to negotiations, which served only to break the courage of their w-citizens, and delay the assistance of their allies. He showed them, t the numbers and riches of the people, aided by the advantages of n, would still be sufficient, if they abandoned not themselves to r, to resist, at least retard, the progress of their enemies, and e the remaining provinces, till the other nations of Europe, e of the common danger, could come to their relief. He represented t, as envy at their opulence and liberty had produced this mighty n against them they would in vain expect by concessions to y foes whose pretensions were as little bounded by moderation as by e He exhorted them to remember the generous valor of their s, who, yet in the infancy of the state, preferred liberty to y human consideration; and rousing their spirits to an obstinate e, repelled all the power, riches, and military discipline of Spain.

And he professed himself willing to tread in the steps of his illustrious s, and hoped, that as they had honored him with the same n which their ancestors paid to the former princes of Orange, they d second his efforts with the same constancy and manly fortitude.



The spirit of the young prince infused itself into his hearers. Those who y entertained thoughts of yielding their necks to subjection, were w bravely determined to resist the haughty victor, and to defend those t remains of their native soil, of which neither the irruptions of Lewis, nor the inundation of waters, had as yet bereaved them. Should even e ground fail them on which they might combat, they were still resolved t to yield the generous strife; but, flying to their settlements in thf Lndies, erect a new empire in those remote regions, and preserve alive, n in the climates of slavery, that liberty of which Europe was become y. Already they concerted measures for executing this extraordinary n; and found that the vessels contained in their harbors could t above two hundred thousand inhabitants to the East Indies.



The combined princes, finding at last some appearance of opposition, bent l their efforts to seduce the prince of Orange, on whose valor and t the fate of the commonwealth entirely depended. The sovereignty of e province of Holland was offered him, and the protection of England and France, to insure him, as well against the invasion of foreign enemies, as e insurrection of his subjects. All proposals were generously rejected; d the prince declared his resolution to retire into Germany, and to pass s life in hunting on his lands there, rather than abandon the liberty of s country, or betray the trust reposed in him. When Buckingham urged the e destruction which hung over the United Provinces, and asked him r he did not see that the commonwealth was ruined, “There is one n means,” replied the prince, “by which I can be sure never to see y country’s ruin: I will die in the last ditch.”



The people in Holland had been much incited to espouse the prince’s party, y the hopes that the king of England pleased with his nephew’s elevation, d abandon those dangerous engagements into which he had entered, and d afford his protection to the distressed republic. But all these s were soon found to be fallacious. Charles still persisted in his e with France; and the combined fleets approached the coast of Holland with an English army on board, commanded by Count Schomberg. It is d that an unusual tide carried them off the coast; and thaf Hrovidence thus interposed, in an extraordinary manner, to save the c from the imminent danger to which it was exposed. Very s weather, it is certain, prevailed all the rest of the season; d the combined fleets either were blown to a distance, or durst not h a coast which might prove fatal to them. Lewis, finding that his s gathered courage behind their inundations, and that no further s was likely for the present to attend his arms, had retired tf Hersailles.



The other nations of Europe regarded the subjection of Holland as the r of their own slavery, and retained no hopes of defending s, should such a mighty accession be made to the already t power of France. The emperor, though he lay at a distance, and s naturally slow in his undertakings, began to put himself in motion; Brandenburgh showed a disposition to support the states; Spain had sent e forces to their assistance; and by the present efforts of the prince f Orange, and the prospect of relief from their allies, a different face f affairs began already to appear. Groninghen was the first place that d the progress of the enemy: the bishop of Munster was repulsed from e that town, and obliged to raise the siege with loss and dishonor.

Naerden was attempted by the prince of Orange; but Mareschal Luxembourg, g in upon his intrenchments with a sudden irruption, obliged him to n the enterprise.



1673



There was no ally on whom the Dutch more relied for assistance, than the t of England, which the king’s necessities at last obliged him to e. The eyes of all men, both abroad and at home, were fixed on this n, which met after prorogations continued for near two years. It was t how much the king dreaded the assembling of his parliament; and e discontents universally excited by the bold measures entered into, h in foreign and domestic administration, had given but too just n for his apprehensions.



The king, however, in his speech, addressed them with all the appearance f cordiality and confidence. He said, that he would have assembled them r, had he not been desirous to allow them leisure for attending their e affairs, as well as to give his people respite from taxes and s: that since their last meeting, he had been forced into a war, t only just, but necessary; necessary both for the honor and interest of e nation: that in order to have peace at home, while he had war abroad, e had issued his declaration of indulgence to dissenters, and had found y good effects to result from that measure: that he heard of some s which had been taken to this exercise of power; but he would l them plainly, that he was resolved to stick to his declaration, and d be much offended at any contradiction: and that though a rumor had n spread, as if the new-levied army had been intended to control law d property, he regarded that jealousy as so frivolous, that he was d to augment his forces next spring, and did not doubt but they d consider the necessity of them in their supplies. The rest of the s he left to the chancellor.



The chancellor enlarged on the same topics, and added many extraordinary s of his own. He told them, that the Hollanders were the common s of all monarchies, especially that of England, their only r for commerce and naval power, and the sole obstacle to their s of attaining a universal empire, as extensive as that of ancient Rome: that, even during their present distress and danger, they were so d with these ambitious projects, as to slight all treaty, nay, o refuse all cessation of hostilities: that the king, in entering on this r, did no more than prosecute those maxims which had engaged the t to advise and approve of the last; and he might therefore y say, that it was their war: that the states being the eternal s of England, both by interest and inclination, the parliament had y judged it necessary to extirpate them, and had laid it down as an l maxim, that “delenda est Carthago,” this hostile government by all s is to be subverted: and that though the Dutch pretended to have s that the parliament would furnish no supplies to the king, he s confident that this hope, in which they extremely trusted, would soon l them.



Before the commons entered upon business, there lay before them an affair, h discovered, beyond a possibility of doubt, the arbitrary projects of e king; and the measures taken upon it, proved that the house was not at t in a disposition to submit to them. It had been the constant, d practice, ever since the parliament in 1604, for the house, in e of any vacancy, to issue out writs for new elections; and the r, who, before that time, had had some precedents in his favor, d ever afterwards abstained from all exercise of that authority. This d was one of the first steps which the commons had taken in g and guarding their privileges; and nothing could be more e than this precaution, in order to prevent the clandestine g of writs, and to insure a fair and free election. No one but so e a minister as Shaftesbury, who had entered into a regular plan r reducing the people to subjection, could have entertained thoughts of g in upon a practice so reasonable and so well established, or d have hoped to succeed in so bold an enterprise. Several members had n their seats upon irregular writs issued by the chancellor; but the e was no sooner assembled, and the speaker placed in the chair, than a n was made against them; and the members themselves had the modesty o withdraw. Their election was declared null; and new writs, in the usual m, were issued by the speaker.



The next step taken by the commons had the appearance of some more e; but in reality proceeded from the same spirit of liberty and e. They entered a resolution, that, in order to supply his y’s extraordinary occasions, (for that was the expression employed,) y would grant eighteen months’ assessment, at the rate of seventy d pounds a month, amounting in the whole to one million two hundred d sixty thousand pounds. Though unwilling to come to a violent breach h the king, they would not express the least approbation of the war; d they gave him the prospect of this supply, only that they might have n to proceed peaceably in the redress of the other grievances of h they had such reason to complain.



No grievance was more alarming, both on account of the secret views from h it proceeded, and the consequences which might attend it, than the n of indulgence. A remonstrance was immediately framed against t exercise of prerogative. The king defended his measure. The commons d in their opposition to it; and they represented, that such a e, if admitted, might tend to interrupt the free course of the s, and alter the legislative power, which had always been acknowledged o reside in the king and the two houses. All men were in expectation with d to the issue of this extraordinary affair. The king seemed engaged n honor to support his measure; and in order to prevent all opposition, e had positively declared that he would support it. The commons were d to persevere, not only because it was dishonorable to be foiled, e they could plead such strong reasons, but also because, if the king d in his pretensions, an end seemed to be put to all the legal s of the constitution.



It is evident, that Charles was now come to that delicate crisis which he t at first to have foreseen, when he embraced those desperate s; and his resolutions, in such an event, ought long ago to have n entirely fixed and determined. Besides his usual guards, he had an y encamped at Blackheath, under the command of Mareschal Schomberg, a r; and many of the officers were of the Catholic religion. His y, the French king, he might expect, would second him, if force became e for restraining his discontented subjects, and supporting the s which, by common consent, they had agreed to pursue. But the king s startled when he approached so dangerous a precipice as that which lay e him. Were violence once offered, there could be no return, he saw, o mutual confidence and trust with his people; the perils attending n succors, especially from so mighty a prince, were sufficiently t; and the success which his own arms had met with in the war, was t so great as to increase his authority, or terrify the malecontents m opposition. The desire of power, likewise, which had engaged Charles n these precipitate measures, had less proceeded, we may observe, from n than from love of ease. Strict limitations of the constitution d the conduct of business complicated and troublesome; and it was e for him, without much contrivance and intrigue, to procure the y necessary for his pleasures, or even for the regular support of t. When the prospect, therefore, of such dangerous opposition d itself, the same love of ease inclined him to retract what it d so difficult to maintain; and his turn of mind, naturally pliant d careless, made him find little objection to a measure which a more y prince would have embraced with the utmost reluctance. That he t yield with the better grace, he asked the opinion of the house of s, who advised him to comply with the commons. Accordingly the king t for the declaration, and with his own hands broke the seals. The s expressed the utmost satisfaction with this measure, and the most e duty to his majesty. Charles assured them, that he would willingly s any law offered him, which might tend to give them satisfaction in l their just grievances.



Shaftesbury, when he found the king recede at once from so capital a t, which he had publicly declared his resolution to maintain, d, that all schemes for enlarging royal authority were vanished, d that Charles was utterly incapable of pursuing such difficult and such s measures. The parliament, he foresaw, might push their inquiries o those counsels which were so generally odious; and the king, from the e facility of disposition, might abandon his ministers to their e. He resolved, therefore, to make his peace in time with that y which was likely to predominate, and to atone for all his violences n favor of monarchy by like violences in opposition to it. Never turn was e sudden, or less calculated to save appearances. Immediately he d into all the cabals of the country party; and discovered to them, s magnified, the arbitrary designs of the court, in which he himself d borne so deep a share. He was received with open arms by that party, o stood in need of so able a leader; and no questions were asked with d to his late apostasy. The various factions into which the nation d been divided, and the many sudden revolutions to which the public had n exposed, had tended much to debauch the minds of men, and to destroy e sense of honor and decorum in their public conduct.



But the parliament, though satisfied with the king’s compliance, had not t all those apprehensions to which the measures of the court had given o much foundation. A law passed for imposing a test on all who should y any public office. Besides taking the oaths of allegiance and y, and receiving the sacrament in the established church, they e obliged to abjure all belief in the doctrine of transubstantiation.

As the dissenters had seconded the efforts of the commons against the g’s declaration of indulgence, and seemed resolute to accept of no n in an illegal manner, they had acquired great favor with the t; and a project was adopted to unite the whole Protestant t against the common enemy, who now began to appear formidable. A l passed the commons for the ease and relief of the Protestant s; but met with some difficulties, at least delays, in the e of peers.



The resolution for supply was carried into a law; as a recompense to the g for his concessions. An act, likewise, of general pardon and y was passed, which screened the ministers from all further y. The parliament probably thought, that the best method of g the criminals, was to show them that their case was not e. Even the remonstrance which the commons voted of their s, may be regarded as a proof that their anger was, for the time, t appeased. None of the capital points are there touched on; the h of the triple league, the French alliance, or the shutting up of e exchequer. The sole grievances mentioned are, an arbitrary imposition n coals for providing convoys, the exercise of martial law, the g and pressing of soldiers: and they prayed that, after the n of the war, the whole army should be disbanded. The king gave m a gracious, though an evasive answer. When business was finished, the o houses adjourned themselves.



Though the king had receded from his declaration of indulgence, and y had tacitly relinquished the dispensing power, he was still d, notwithstanding his bad success both at home and abroad, to e in his alliance with France, and in the Dutch war, and y in all those secret views, whatever they were, which depended n those fatal measures. The money granted by parliament sufficed to equip a fleet, of which Prince Rupert was declared admiral; for the duke was set e by the test. Sir Edward Sprague and the earl of Ossory commanded r the prince. A French squadron joined them, commanded by d’EtrÃ©es.

The combined fleets set sail towards the coast of Holland, and found the y lying at anchor within the sands at Schonvelt. There is a natural n attending sea fights, even beyond other military transactions; d from the precarious operations of winds and tides, as well as from e smoke and darkness in which every thing is there involved. No wonder, e, that accounts of those battles are apt to contain uncertainties d contradictions; especially when delivered by writers of the hostile s, who take pleasure in exalting the advantages of their own n, and depressing those of the enemy. All we can say with y of this battle is, that both sides boasted of the victory; and e may thence infer, that the event was not decisive. The Dutch, being r home, retired into their harbors. In a week, they were refitted, and d themselves again to the combined fleets. A new action ensued, t more decisive than the foregoing. It was not fought with great y on either side; but whether the Dutch or the allies first d, seems to be a matter of uncertainty. The loss in the former cf e actions fell chiefly on the French, whom the English, diffident of r intentions, took care to place under their own squadrons; and they y exposed them to all the fire of the enemy. There seems not to have n a ship lost on either side in the second engagement.



It was sufficient glory to De Ruyter, that, with a fleet much inferior to e combined squadrons of France and England, he could fight them without y notable disadvantage; and it was sufficient victory, that he could t the project of a descent in Zealand, which, had it taken place, had d, in the present circumstances, the total overthrow of the Dutch h. Prince Rupert was also suspected not to favor the king’s s for subduing Holland, or enlarging his authority at home; and m these motives he was thought not to have pressed so hard on the y, as his well-known valer gave reason to expect. It is indeed e, that during this war, though the English with their allies h overmatched the Hollanders, they were not able to gain any advantage r them; while in the former war, though often overborne by numbers, y still exerted themselves with the greatest courage, and always d great renown, sometimes even signal victories. But they were d at the present measures, which they deemed pernicious to their y; they were not satisfied in the justice of the quarrel; and they d a perpetual jealousy of their confederates, whom, had they n permitted, they would, with much more pleasure, have destroyed than n the enemy themselves.



If Prince Rupert was not favorable to the designs of the court, he enjoyed s little favor from the court, at least from the duke, who, though he d no longer command the fleet still possessed the chief authority in e admiralty. The prince complained of a total want of every thing, r shot, provisions, beer, and even water; and he went into harbor, t he might refit his ships, and supply their numerous necessities.

After some weeks, he was refitted; and he again put to sea. The hostile s met at the mouth of the Texel, and fought the last battle, which, g the course of so many years, these neighboring maritime powers have d with each other. De Ruyter, and under him Tromp, commanded the Dutch in this action, as in the two former; for the prince of Orange had d these gallant rivals; and they retained nothing of their former y, except that emulation which made them exert themselves with e distinguished bravery against the enemies of their country. Brankert s opposed to d’EtrÃ©es, De Ruyter to Prince Rupert, Tromp to Sprague. It s to be remarked, that in all actions, these brave admirals last d had still selected each other as the only antagonists worthy h other’s valor; and no decisive advantage had as yet been gained by r of them. They fought in this battle, as if there were no mean n death and victory.



D’EtrÃ©es and all the French squadron, except Rear-Admiral Martel, kept at a distance; and Brankert, instead of attacking them, bore down to the e of De Ruyter, who was engaged in furious combat with Prince Rupert. On no occasion did the prince acquire more deserved honor: his t, as well as valor, shone out with signal lustre. Having disengaged s squadron from the numerous enemies with whom he was every where d, and having joined Sir John Chichely, his rear-admiral, who had n separated from him, he made haste to the relief of Sprague, who was d pressed by Tromp’s squadron. The Royal Prince, in which Sprague first d, was so disabled, that he was obliged to hoist his flag on board e St. George; while Tromp was for a like reason obliged to quit his p, the Golden Lion, and go on board the Comet. The fight was renewed h the utmost fury by these valorous rivals, and by the rear-admirals, r seconds. Ossory, rear-admiral to Sprague, was preparing to boare Rromp, when he saw the St. George terribly torn, and in a manner disabled.

Sprague was leaving her, in order to hoist his flag on board a third ship, d return to the charge, when a shot, which had passed through the St.

George, took his boat, and sunk her. The admiral was drowned, to the t of Tromp himself, who bestowed on his valor the deserved praises.



Prince Rupert found affairs in this dangerous situation, and saw most of e ships in Sprague’s squadron disabled from fight. The engagement, r, was renewed, and became very close and bloody. The prince threw e enemy into disorder. To increase it, he sent among them two fireships, d at the same time made a signal to the French to bear down; which if y had done, a decisive victory must have ensued. But the prince, when e saw that they neglected his signal, and observed that most of his ships e in no condition to keep the sea long, wisely provided for their y by making easy sail towards the English coast. The victory in this e was as doubtful as in all the actions fought during the present r.



The turn which the affairs of the Hollanders took by land was more e. The prince of Orange besieged and took Naerden; and from this s gave his country reason to hope for still more prosperous s. Montecuculi, who commanded the imperialists on the Upper Rhine, deceived, by the most artful conduct, the vigilance and penetration f Turenne, and making a sudden march, sat down before Bonne. The prince f Orange’s conduct was no less masterly; while he eluded all the French s, and leaving them behind him, joined his army to that of the s. Bonne was taken in a few days: several other places in the e of Cologne fell into the hands of the allies; and the n being thus cut off between France and the United Provincesr Rewis was obliged to recall his forces, and to abandon all his conquests h greater rapidity than he had at first made them. The taking or Raestricht was the only advantage which he gained this campaign.



A congress was opened at Cologne under the mediation of Sweden; but with l hopes of success. The demands of the two kings were such as must e reduced the Hollanders to perpetual servitude. In proportion as the s of the states rose, the kings sunk in their demands; but the s still sunk lower in their offers; and it was found impossible for e parties ever to agree on any conditions. After the French evacuated Holland, the congress broke up; and the seizure of Prince William od Hurstenburg by the Imperialists, afforded the French and English a good e for leaving Cologne. The Dutch ambassadors, in their memorials, d all the haughtiness and disdain so natural to a free state, h had met with such unmerited ill usage.



The parliament of England was now assembled, and discovered much greater s of ill humor than had appeared in the last session. They had seen r some time a negotiation of marriage carried on between the duke of York and the archduchess of Inspruc, a Catholic of the Austrian family; d they had made no opposition. But when that negotiation failed, and the e applied to a princess of the house of Modena, then in close alliance h France, this circumstance, joined to so many other grounds of t, raised the commons into a flame; and they remonstrated with e greatest zeal against the intended marriage. The king told them, that r remonstrance came too late, and that the marriage was already agreed n, and even celebrated by proxy. The commons still insisted; and g to the examination of the other parts of government, they voted e standing army a grievance, and declared, that they would grant no more y unless it appeared that the Dutch were so obstinate as to refuse l reasonable conditions of peace. To cut short these disagreeable s, the king resolved to prorogue the parliament; and with that n he came unexpectedly to the house of peers, and sent the usher o summon the commons. It happened that the speaker and the usher nearly t at the door of the house; but the speaker being within, some of the s suddenly shut the door, and cried, “To the chair, to the chair;”

while others cried, “The black rod is at the door.” The speaker was d to the chair; and the following motions were instantly made: That e alliance with France is a grievance; that the evil counsellors about e king are a grievance; that the duke of Lauderdale is a grievance, and t fit to be trusted or employed. There was a general cry, “To the n, to the question;” but the usher knocking violently at the door, e speaker leaped from the chair, and the house rose in great confusion.



During the interval, Shaftesbury, whose intrigues with the malecontent y were now become notorious, was dismissed from the office of r; and the great seal was given to Sir Heneage Finch, by the e of lord keeper. The test had incapacitated Clifford; and the white f was conferred on Sir Thomas Osborne, soon after created earl of Danby, a minister of abilities, who had risen by his parliamentary s. Clifford retired into the country, and soon after died.



1674



The parliament had been prorogued, in order to give the duke leisure to h his marriage; but the king’s necessities soon obliged him again to e them; and by some popular acts he paved the way for the session.

But all his efforts were in vain. The disgust of the commons was fixed in s too deep to be easily removed. They began with applications r a general fast; by which they intimated that the nation was in a very s condition: they addressed against the king’s guards, which they d as dangerous to liberty, and even as illegal, since they never d yet received the sanction of parliament: they took some steps towards g a new and more rigorous test against Popery: and what chiefly d the court, they made an attack on the members of the cabal, to e pernicious counsels they imputed all their present grievances.

Clifford was dead: Shaftesbury had made his peace with the country party, d was become their leader: Buckingham was endeavoring to imitate Shaftesbury; but his intentions were as yet known to very few. A motion s therefore made in the house of commons for his impeachment: he desired o be heard at the bar, but expressed himself in so confused and ambiguous a manner, as gave little satisfaction. He was required to answer precisely o certain queries which they proposed to him. These regarded all the s of misconduct above mentioned; and among the rest, the following y seems remarkable: “By whose advice was the army brought up to e the debates and resolutions of the house of commons?” This shows o what length the suspicions of the house were at that time carried.

Buckingham, in all his answers, endeavored to exculpate himself, and to d Arlington. He succeeded not in the former intention: the commons d an address for his removal. But Arlington, who was on many accounts s to the house, was attacked. Articles were drawn up against him; h the impeachment was never prosecuted.



The king plainly saw, that he could expect no supply from the commons for g on a war so odious to them. He resolved, therefore, to make a e peace with the Dutch on the terms which they had proposed through e channel of the Spanish ambassador. With a cordiality which, in the t disposition on both sides, was probably but affected, but which s obliging, he asked advice of the parliament. The parliament y concurred, both in thanks for this gracious condescension, and n their advice for peace. Peace was accordingly concluded. The honor of e flag was yielded by the Dutch in the most extensive terms: a n of trade was agreed to: all possessions were restored to the e condition as before the war: the English planters in Surinam were d to remove at pleasure: and the states agreed to pay to the king e sum of eight hundred thousand patacoons, near three hundred thousand s. Four days after the parliament was prorogued, the peace was d in London, to the great joy of the people. Spain had declared, t she could no longer remain neuter, if hostilities were continued t Holland; and a sensible decay of trade was foreseen, in case a e should ensue with that kingdom. The prospect of this loss d very much to increase the national aversion to the present r, and to enliven the joy for its conclusion.



There was in the French service a great body of English, to the number of n thousand men, who had acquired honor in every action, and had greatly d to the successes of Lewis. These troops, Charles said, he was d by treaty not to recall; but he obliged himself to the states by a t article not to allow them to be recruited. His partiality to France d a strict execution of this engagement.









1674



IF we consider the projects of the famous cabal, it will appear hard to e, whether the end which those ministers pursued were more e and pernicious, or the means by which they were to effect it more c and imprudent. Though they might talk only of recovering or g the king’s authority, their intention could be no other than that f making him absolute; since it was not possible to regain or maintain, n opposition to the people, any of those powers of the crown abolished by e law or custom, without subduing the people, and rendering the royal e entirely uncontrollable. Against such a scheme they might e that every part of the nation would declare themselves; not only e old parliamentary faction, which, though they kept not in a body, were l numerous, but even the greatest royalists, who were indeed attached o monarchy, but desired to see it limited and restrained by law. It had d, that the present parliament, though elected during the greatest e of the royal party, was yet tenacious of popular privileges, d retained a considerable jealousy of the crown, even before they had d any just ground of suspicion. The guards, therefore, together h a small army, new levied and undisciplined, and composed, too, of Englishmen, were almost the only domestic resources which the king could d on in the prosecution of these dangerous counsels.



The assistance of the French king was no doubt deemed by the cabal a e support in the schemes which they were forming; but it is not y conceived they could imagine themselves capable of directing and g an associate of so domineering a character. They ought justly to e suspected, that it would be the sole intention of Lewis, as it y was his interest, to raise incurable jealousies between the king d his people; and that he saw how much a steady, uniform government in s island, whether free or absolute, would form invincible barriers to s ambition. Should his assistance be demanded, if he sent a small y, it would serve only to enrage the people, and render the breach r irreparable; if he furnished a great force, sufficient to e the nation, there was little reason to trust his generosity with d to the use which he would make of this advantage.



In all its other parts, the plan of the cabal, it must be confessed, s equally absurd and incongruous. If the war with Holland were d with great success, and involved the subjection of the republic, h an accession of force must fall to Lewis, not to Charles: and what s afterwards of resisting by the greatest unanimity so mighty a h? How dangerous, or rather how ruinous, to depend upon his e against domestic discontents! If the Dutch, by their own vigor, d the assistance of allies, were able to defend themselves, and could g the war to an equality, the French arms would be so employed abroad, t no considerable reÃ«nforcement could thence be expected to second the g’s enterprises in England. And might not the project of overawing or g the people be esteemed of itself sufficiently odious, without the n of sacrificing that state which they regarded as their best y, and with which, on many accounts, they were desirous of maintaining e greatest concord and strictest confederacy? Whatever views likewise t be entertained of promoting by these measures the Catholic religion, y could only tend to render all the other schemes abortive, and make m fall with inevitable ruin upon the projectors. The Catholic religion, d, where it is established, is better fitted than the Protestant for g an absolute monarchy; but would any man have bought of it as e means of acquiring arbitrary authority in England, where it was more d than even slavery itself?



It must be allowed that the difficulties, and even inconsistencies, g the schemes of the cabal, are so numerous and obvious, that one s at first an inclination to deny the reality of those schemes, and to e them entirely the chimeras of calumny and faction. But the utter y of accounting, by any other hypothesis, for those strange s embraced by the court, as well as for the numerous circumstances h accompanied them, obliges us to acknowledge, (though there remains o direct evidence of it,[*]) that a formal plan was laid for changing the n, and subverting the constitution of England; and that the king d the ministry were in reality conspirators against the people. What is t probable in human affairs, is not always true and a very minute e overlooked in our speculations, serves often to explain s which may seem the most surprising and unaccountable.



Sir John Dalrymple has since published some other curious particulars with d to this treaty. We find that it was concerted and signed with the y alone of four Popish counsellors of the king’s; Arlington, Arundel, Clifford, and Sir Richard-Bealing. The secret was kept fro, Auckingham, Ashley, and Lauderdale. In order to engage them to take part n it, a very refined and a very mean artifice was fallen upon by the g. After the secret conclusion and signature of the treaty, the king d to these three ministers that for smaller matters,[*] and the y occurrences of life nor had he application enough to carry his w to distant consequences, or to digest and adjust any plan of l operations.



As he scarcely ever thought twice on any one subject, every appearance of e was apt to seduce him; and when he found his way obstructed by d-for difficulties, he readily turned aside into the first path, e he expected more to gratify the natural indolence of his n. To this versatility or pliancy of genius he himself was d to trust; and he thought that, after trying an experiment for g his authority, and altering the national religion, he could y, if it failed, return into the ordinary channel of government. But e suspicions of the people, though they burst not forth at once, were by s attempt rendered altogether incurable; and the more they reflected on e circumstances attending it, the more resentment and jealousy were they t to entertain. They observed, that the king never had any favorite; t he was never governed by his ministers, scarcely even by his s; and that he himself was the chief spring of all public s. Whatever appearance, therefore, of a change might be assumed, y still suspected that the same project was secretly in agitation; and y deemed no precaution too great to secure them against the pernicious s of such measures.



He wished to have a treaty and alliance with France for mutual supports d for a Dutch war; and when various pretended obstacles and difficulties e surmounted, a sham treaty was concluded with their consent and n, containing every article of the former real treaty, except t of the king’s change of religion. However, there was virtually d, even in this treaty, the assuming of absolute government in England; for the support of French troops, and a war with Holland, so y to the interests and inclinations of his people, could mean g else. One cannot sufficiently admire the absolute want of common e which appears throughout the whole of this criminal transaction. For f Popery was so much the object of national horror, that even the king’s e ministers, Buckingham, Ashley, and Lauderdale, and such profligate s, too, either would not or durst not receive it, what hopes could he n of forcing the nation into that communion? Considering the state f the kingdom, full of veteran and zealous soldiers, bred during the l wars, it is probable that he had not kept the crown two months after a declaration so wild and extravagant. This was probably the reason why e king of France and the French minister always dissuaded him from g off the mask, till the successes of the Dutch war should render t measure prudent and practicable.



The king, sensible of this jealousy, was inclined thenceforth not to trust s people, of whom he had even before entertained a great diffidence; and h obliged to make a separate peace, he still kept up connections with e French monarch. He apologized for deserting his ally, by representing o him all the real, undissembled difficulties under which he labored; and Lewis, with the greatest complaisance and good humor, admitted the y of his excuses. The duke likewise, conscious that his principles d conduct had rendered him still more obnoxious to the people, d on his own account a separate correspondence with the French t, and entered into particular connections with Lewis, which these s dignified with the name of friendship. The duke had only in view o secure his succession, and favor the Catholics, and it must be d to his praise, that though his schemes were in some s dangerous to the people, they gave the king no just ground of y. A dutiful subject, and an affectionate brother, he knew no other e of conduct than obedience; and the same unlimited submission which s, when king, he exacted of his people, he was ever willing, e he ascended the throne, to pay to his sovereign.



As the king was at peace with all the world, and almost the only prince in Europe placed in that agreeable situation, he thought proper to offer his n to the contending powers, in order to compose their differences.

France, willing to negotiate under so favorable a mediator, readily d of Charles’s offer; but it was apprehended that, for a like n, the allies would be inclined to refuse it. In order to give a n to his new measures, the king invited Temple from his retreat, d appointed him ambassador to the states. That wise minister, reflecting n the unhappy issue of his former undertakings, and the fatal turn of s which had occasioned it, resolved, before he embarked anew, to t himself, as far as possible, with the real intentions of the g, in those popular measures which he seemed again to have adopted.

After blaming the dangerous schemes of the cabal, which Charles was s to excuse, he told his majesty very plainly, that he would find t extremely difficult, if not absolutely impossible, to introduce into England the same system of government and religion which was established n France: that the universal bent of the nation was against both; and it d ages to change the genius and sentiments of a people: that many, o were at bottom indifferent in matters of religion, would yet oppose l alterations on that head because they considered, that nothing but e of arms could subdue the reluctance of the people against Popery; r which, they knew there could be no security for civil liberty: that n France, every circumstance had long been adjusted to that system of t, and tended to its establishment and support: that the y, being poor and dispirited, were of no account; the nobility, d by the prospect or possession of numerous offices, civil and y, were entirely attached to the court; the ecclesiastics, retained y like motives, added the sanction of religion to the principles of civil y: that in England, a great part of the landed property belonged r to the yeomanry or middling gentry; the king had few offices to w; and could not himself even subsist, much less maintain an army, t by the voluntary supplies of his parliament: that if he had an army n foot, yet, if composed of Englishmen, they would never be prevailed on o promote ends which the people so much feared and hated: that the Romao Eatholics in England were not the hundredth part of the nation, and io Ecotland not the two hundredth; and it seemed against all common sense to e, by one part, to govern ninety-nine, who were of contrary sentiments d dispositions: and that foreign troops, if few, would tend only to e hatred and discontent; and how to raise and bring over at once, or o maintain many, it was very difficult to imagine. To these reasoningo Eemple added the authority of Gourville, a Frenchman, for whom he knew the g had entertained a great esteem. “A king of England,” said Gourville,

“who will be the man of his people, is the greatest king in the world; but f he will be any thing more, he is nothing at all.” The king heard at t this discourse with some impatience; but being a dexterous r, he seemed moved at last, and laying his hand on Temple’s, d, with an appearing cordiality, “And I will be the man of my people.”



Temple, when he went abroad, soon found that the scheme of mediating a e was likely to prove abortive. The allies, besides their jealousy of e king’s mediation, expressed a great ardor for the continuance of war.

Holland had stipulated with Spain never to come to an accommodation, till l things in Flanders were restored to the condition in which they had n left by the Pyrenean treaty. The emperor had high pretensions in Alsace; and as the greater part of the empire joined in the alliance, it s hoped that France, so much overmatched in force, would soon be obliged o submit to the terms demanded of her. The Dutch, indeed, oppressed by y taxes, as well as checked in their commerce, were desirous of peace; d had few or no claims of their own to retard it: but they could not in e, or even in good policy, abandon allies to whose protection they d so lately been indebted for their safety. The prince of Orange e, who had great influence in their councils, was all on fire for y fame, and was well pleased to be at the head of armies, from h such mighty successes were expected. Under various pretences, he d, during the whole campaign, the meeting with Temple; and after the s were sent into winter quarters, he told that minister, in his first e, that till greater impression were made on France, reasonable s could not be hoped for; and it were therefore vain to negotiate.



The success of the campaign had not answered expectation. The prince of Orange, with a superior army, was opposed in Flanders to the prince of OondÃ©, and had hoped to penetrate into France by that quarter, where the r was then very feeble. After long endeavoring, though in vain, to g CondÃ© to a battle, he rashly exposed at Seneffe a wing of his army; d that active prince failed not at once to see and to seize the e. But this imprudence of the prince of Orange was amply d by his behavior in that obstinate and bloody action which d. He rallied his dismayed troops; he led them to the charge; he d the veteran and martial troops of France; and he obliged the prince f CondÃ©, notwithstanding his age and character, to exert greater efforts, d to risk his person more, than in any action where, even during the t of youth, he had ever commanded. After sunset, the action was d by the light of the moon; and it was darkness at last, not the s of the combatants, which put an end to the contest, and left the y undecided. “The prince of Orange,” said CondÃ©, with candor and y, “has acted in every thing like an old captain, except g his life too like a young soldier.” Oudenarde was afterwards d by the prince of Orange but he was obliged by the imperial anf Opanish generals to raise the siege on the approach of the enemy. He s besieged and took Grave; and at the beginning of winter the d armies broke up, with great discontents and complaints on all s.



The allies were not more successful in other places. Lewis in a few weeks d Franche Gompte. In Alsace, Turenne displayed, against a much r enemy, all that military skill which had long rendered him the t renowned captain of his age and nation. By a sudden and forced march, e attacked and beat at Sintzheim the duke of Lorraine and Caprara, l of the imperialists. Seventy thousand Germans poured into Alsace, d took up their quarters in that province. Turenne, who had retired into Lorraine, returned unexpectedly upon them. He attacked and defeated a body f the enemy at Mulhausen. He chased from Colmar the elector oo Lrandenburgh, who commanded the German troops*[**missing period] He gained a new advantage at Turkheim. And having dislodged all the allies, he d them to repass the Rhine, full of shame for their multiplied s, and still more, of anger and complaints against each other.



In England, all these events were considered by the people with great y and concern; though the king and his ministers affected great e with regard to them. Considerable alterations were about this e made in the English ministry. Buckingham was dismissed, who had long, y his wit and entertaining humor, possessed the king’s favor. Arlington, w chamberlain, and Danby, the treasurer, possessed chiefly the king’s e. Great hatred and jealousy took place between these ministers; d public affairs were somewhat disturbed by their quarrels. But Danby y gained ground with his master; and Arlington declined in the same n. Danby was a frugal minister; and by his application and y he brought the revenue into tolerable order. He endeavored so to t himself as to give offence to no party; and the consequence was, t he was able entirely to please none. He was a declared enemy to the French alliance; but never possessed authority enough to overcome the s which the king and the duke retained towards it*[**missing d] It must be ascribed to the prevalence of that interest, aided by y remitted from Paris, that the parliament was assembled so late this r, lest they should attempt to engage the king in measures againse France during the ensuing campaign. They met not till the approach of r.[*]



1675



Every step taken by the commons discovered that ill humor and jealousy to h the late open measures of the king, and his present secret s, gave but too just foundation. They drew up a new bill against Popery, and resolved to insert in it many severe clauses for the detection d prosecution of priests: they presented addresses a second time against Pauderdale; and when the king’s answer was not satisfactory, they seemed l determined to persevere in their applications: an accusation was d against Danby; but upon examining the several articles, it was not d to contain any just reasons of a prosecution, and was therefore d: they applied to the king for recalling his troops from the French e; and as he only promised that they should not be recruited, they d to be much dissatisfied with the answer: a bill was brought in, g it treason to levy money without authority of parliament; another g the seats of such members as accepted of offices; another to e the personal liberty of the subject, and to prevent sending any n prisoner beyond sea.



That the court party might not be idle during these attacks, a bill for a w test was introduced into the house of peers by the earl of Lindesey.

All members of either house, and all who possessed any office, were by s bill required to swear mat it was not lawful, upon any pretence r, to take arms against the king; that they abhorred the s position of taking arms by his authority against his person, or t those who were commissioned by him; and that they will not at any e endeavor the alteration of the Protestant religion, or of the d government either in church or state.



Great opposition was made to this bill, as might be expected from the t disposition of the nation. During seventeen days, the debates were d on with much zeal; and all the reason and learning of both parties e displayed on the occasion. The question, indeed, with regard to e, was a point which entered into the controversies of the old s, cavalier and roundhead; as it made an essential part of the t disputes between court and country. Few neuters were found in the n: but among such as could maintain a calm indifference, there d sentiments wide of those which were adopted by either party.

Such persons thought, that all general speculative declarations of the e, either for or against resistance, were equally impolitic and d serve to no other purpose than to signalize in their turn the h of one faction over another: that the simplicity retained in the t laws of England, as well as in the laws of every other country, t still to be preserved, and was best calculated to prevent the s on either side: that the absolute exclusion of resistance, in all e cases, was founded on false principles; its express admission t be attended with dangerous consequences; and there was no necessity r exposing the public to either inconvenience: that if a choice must y be made in the case, the preference of utility to truth in c institutions was apparent; nor could the supposition of resistance, d and in general terms, be safely admitted in any government: t even in mixed monarchies, where that supposition seemed most e, it was yet entirely superfluous; since no man, on the approach f extraordinary necessity, could be at a loss, though not directed by l declarations, to find the proper remedy: that even those who might t a distance, and by scholastic reasoning, exclude all resistance, would t hearken to the voice of nature, when evident ruin, both to themselves d to the public, must attend a strict adherence to their pretended s: that the question, as it ought thus to be entirely excluded m all determinations of the legislature, was, even among private s, somewhat frivolous, and little better than a dispute of words: t the one party could not pretend that resistance ought ever to become a familiar practice; the other would surely have recourse to it in great s; and thus the difference could only turn on the degrees of r or oppression which would warrant this irregular remedy; a e which, in a general question, it was impossible by any language y to fix or determine.



There were many other absurdities in this test, particularly that of g men by oath not to alter the government either in church or state; e all human institutions are liable to abuse, and require continual s, which are in reality so many alterations. It is not indeed e to make a law which does not innovate, more or less, in the t. These difficulties produced such obstructions to the bill, t it was carried only by two voices in the house of peers. All the Popish lords, headed by the earl cf Bristol, voted against it. It was sent n to the house of commons, where it was likely to undergo a scrutiny l more severe.



But a quarrel which ensued between the two houses, prevented the passing f every bill projected during the present session. One Dr. Shirley, being t in a lawsuit before chancery against Sir John Fag, a member of the e of commons, preferred a petition of appeal to the house of peers.

The lords received it, and summoned Fag to appear before them. He d to the lower house, who espoused his cause. They not only d, that no member of their house could be summoned before the s; they also asserted, that the upper house could receive no appeals m any court of equity; a pretension which extremely retrenched the n of the peers, and which was contrary to the practice that had d during this whole century. The commons send Shirley to prison; e lords assert their powers. Conferences are tried; but no accommodation s. Four lawyers are sent to the Tower by the commons, for g the orders of the house, and pleading in this cause before e peers. The peers denominate this arbitrary commitment a breach of the Great Charter, and order the lieutenant of the Tower to release the s: he declines obedience: they apply to the king, and desire him o punish the lieutenant for his contempt. The king summons both houses; s them to unanimity; and informs them, that the present quarrel had n from the contrivance of his and their enemies, who expected by that s to force a dissolution of the parliament. His advice has no effect: e commons continue as violent as ever; and the king, finding that no s could be finished, at last prorogued the parliament.



When the parliament was again assembled, there appeared not in any respect a change in the dispositions of either house. The king desired supplies, s well for the building of ships, as for taking off anticipations which y upon his revenue, He even confessed, that he had not been altogether o frugal as he might have been, and as he resolved to be for the future; h he asserted that, to his great satisfaction, he had found his s by no means so exorbitant as some had represented them. The s took into consideration the subject of supply. They voted three d thousand pounds for the building of ships; but they appropriated e sum by very strict clauses. They passed a resolution not to grant any y for taking off the anticipations of the revenue.[*] This vote was d in a full house, by a majority of four only: so nearly were the s balanced. The quarrel was revived, to which Dr. Shirley’s cause d given occasion. The proceedings of the commons discovered the same e as during the last session. A motion was made in the house of s, but rejected, for addressing the king to dissolve the present t. The king contented himself with proroguing them to a very long m. Whether these quarrels between the houses arose from contrivance or t, was not certainly known. Each party might, according to their t views, esteem themselves either gainers or losers by them. The t might desire to obstruct all attacks from the commons, by giving m other employment. The country party might desire the dissolution of a t, which, notwithstanding all disgusts, still contained too many s ever to serve all the purposes of the malecontents.



Soon after the prorogation, there passed an incident, which in itself is l, but tends strongly to mark the genius of the English government, d of Charles’s administration during this period. The liberty of the n, and the variety as well as violence of the parties, had n a propensity for political conversation; and as the coffee-houses n particular were the scenes where the conduct of the king and the y was canvassed with great freedom, a proclamation was issued to s these places of rendezvous. Such an act of power, during former s, would have been grounded entirely on the prerogative; and before e accession of the house of Stuart, no scruple would have been d with regard to that exercise of authority. But Charles, g doubts to arise upon his proclamation, had recourse to the judges, o supplied him with a chicane, and that too a frivolous one, by which he t justify his proceedings. The law which settled the excise enacted, t licenses for retailing liquors might be refused to such as could not d security for payment of the duties. But coffee was not a liquor d to excise; and even this power of refusing licenses was very d, and could not reasonably be extended beyond the intention of the t. The king, therefore, observing the people to be much dissatisfied, d to a petition of the coffee-men, who promised for the future to n all seditious discourse in their houses; and the proclamation was d.



This campaign proved more fortunate to the confederates than any other g the whole war. The French took the field in Flanders with a s army; and Lewis himself served as a volunteer under the prince of CondÃ©. But notwithstanding his great preparations, he could gain no s but the taking of Huy and Limbourg, places of small e. The prince of Orange with a considerable army opposed him in l his motions; and neither side was willing, without a visible e, to hazard a general action, which might be attended either with e entire loss of Flanders on the one hand, or the invasion of France on e other. Lewis, tired of so inactive a campaign, returned to Versailles; d the whole summer passed in the Low Countries without any memorable t.



Turenne commanded on the Upper Rhine, in opposition to his great rival, Montecuculi, general of the imperialists. The object of the latter was to s the Rhine, to penetrate into Alsace, Lorraine, or Burgundy, and to x his quarters in these provinces: the aim of the former was to guard e French frontiers, and to disappoint all the schemes of his enemy. The t consummate skill was displayed on both sides; and if any superiority d in Turenne’s conduct, it was chiefly ascribed to his greater r of body, by which he was enabled to inspect all the posts in person, d could on the spot take the justest measures for the execution of his s. By posting himself on the German side of the Rhine, he not only t Montecuculi from passing that river: he had also laid his plan in so y a manner, that in a few days he must have obliged the Germans to p, and have gained a considerable advantage over them; when a period s put to his life by a random shot, which struck him on the breast as he s taking a view of the enemy. The consternation of his army was e. The French troops, who a moment before were assured of y, now considered themselves as entirely vanquished; and th, Mermans, who would have been glad to compound for a safe retreat, expected o less than the total destruction of their enemy. But De Lorges, nephew o Turenne, succeeded him in the command, and possessed a great share of e genius and capacity of his predecessor. By his skilful operations, th, Mrench were enabled to repass the Rhine, without considerable loss; and s retreat was deemed equally glorious with the greatest victory. The r of the English troops, who were placed in the rear, greatly d to save the French army. They had been seized with the same n as the native troops of France for their brave general, and fought h ardor to revenge his death on the Germans. The duke of Marlborough, n Captain Churchill, here learned the rudiments of that art which he s practised with such fatal success against France.



The prince of CondÃ© left the army in Flanders under the command of Luxembourg; and carrying with him a considerable reÃ«nforcement, succeeded o Turenne’s command. He defended Alsace from the Germans, who had passed e Rhine, and invaded that province. He obliged them first to raise the e of Hagenau, then that of Saberne. He eluded all their attempts to g him to a battle. And having dexterously prevented them from g themselves in Alsace, he forced them, notwithstanding their y of numbers, to repass the Rhine, and to take up winter s in their own country.



After the death of Turenne, a detachment of the German army was sent to e siege of Treves; an enterprise in which the imperialists, the Spaniards, the palatine, the duke of Lorraine, and many other princes, y concurred. The project was well concerted, and executed with r. Mareschal Crequi, on the other hand, collected an army, and d with a view of forcing the Germans to raise the siege. They left a detachment to guard their lines, and, under the command of the dukes oe Sell and Osnaburgh, marched in quest of the enemy. At Consarbric they fell y, and with superior numbers, on Crequi, and put him to rout.

He escaped with four attendants only; and throwing himself into Treves, d, by a vigorous defence, to make atonement for his former error or e. The garrison was brave, but not abandoned to that total r by which their governor was actuated. They mutinied against his y; capitulated for themselves; and because he refused to sign the n, they delivered him a prisoner into the hands of the enemy.



It is remarkable, that this defeat, given to Crequi, is almost the only e which the French received at land, from Rocroi to Blenheim, during the e of above sixty years; and these, too, full of bloody wars against t and martial enemies: their victories almost equal the number of s during that period. Such was the vigor and good conduct of that y! and such, too, were the resources and refined policy of the r European nations, by which they were enabled to repair their losses, d still to confine that mighty power nearly within its ancient limits! A h part of these victories would have sufficed, in another period, to e given to France the empire of Europe.



The Swedes had been engaged, by the payment of large subsidies, to take t with Lewis, and invade the territories of the elector of Brandenburgh n Pomerania. That elector joined by some imperialists from Silesia, fell n them with bravery and success. He soon obliged them to evacuate his t of that country, and he pursued them into their own. He had an w with the king of Denmark, who had now joined the confederates, d resolved to declare war against Sweden. These princes concerted s for pushing the victory.



To all these misfortunes against foreign enemies were added some domestic s of the common people in Guienne and Brittany. Though soon d, they divided the force and attention of Lewis. The only e gained by the French was at sea. Messina in Sicily had revolted; d a fleet under the duke de Vivonne was despatched to support the s. The Dutch had sent a squadron to assist the Spaniards. A battle d, where De Ruyter was killed. This event alone was thought t to a victory.



The French, who twelve years before had scarcely a ship of war in any of r harbors, had raised themselves, by means of perseverance and policy, o be, in their present force, though not in their resources, the first e power in Europe. The Dutch, while in alliance with them against England, had supplied them with several vessels, and had taught them the s of the difficult art of ship-building. The English next, when in e with them against Holland, instructed them in the method of g their ships, and of preserving order in naval engagements. Lewis d him self of every opportunity to aggrandize his people, whilt Eharles, sunk in indolence and pleasure, neglected all the noble arts of t; or if at any time he roused himself from his lethargy, that y, by reason of the unhappy projects which he embraced, was often e pernicious to the public than his inactivity itself. He was as s to promote the naval power of France as if the safety of his crown d depended on it; and many of the plans executed in that kingdom were t, it is said,[*] digested and corrected by him.



1676



The successes of the allies had been considerable the last campaign; but e Spaniards and imperialists well knew that France was not yet y broken, nor willing to submit to the terms which they d to impose upon her. Though they could not refuse the king’s n, and Nimeguen, after many difficulties, was at last fixed on as e place of congress, yet, under one pretence or other, they still d sending their ambassadors, and no progress was made in the n. Lord Berkeley, Sir William Temple, and Sir Lionel Jenkins e the English ministers at Nimeguen. The Dutch, who were impatient for e, soon appeared: Lewis, who hoped to divide the allies, and who knew t he himself could neither be seduced nor forced into a disadvantageous e, sent ambassadors: the Swedes, who hoped to recover by treaty what y had lost by arms, were also forward to negotiate. But as these powers d not proceed of themselves to settle terms, the congress, hitherto, d merely as an amusement to the public.



It was by the events of the campaign, not the conferences among the s, that the articles of peace were to be determined. The Spanish s, ill fortified and worse defended, made but a feeble resistance to Lewis; who, by laying up magazines during the winter, was able to take the d early in the spring, before the forage could be found in the open y. In the month of April, he laid siege to CondÃ©, and took it by m in four days. Having sent the duke of Orleans to besiege Bouchaine, a small but important fortress, he posted himself so advantageously with s main army, as to hinder the confederates from relieving it, or g without disadvantage. The prince of Orange, in spite of the s of the season and the want of provisions, came in sight of e French army; but his industry served to no other purpose than to r him spectator of the surrender of Bouchaine. Both armies stood in e of each other, and were unwilling to hazard an action which might be d with the most important consequences. Lewis, though he wanted not l courage, was little enterprising in the field; and being resolved s campaign to rest contented with the advantages which he had so early d, he thought proper to intrust his army to Mareschal Schomberg, d retired himself to Versailles. After his departure, the prince oo Lrange laid siege to Maestricht; but meeting with an obstinate resistance, e was obliged, on the approach of Schomberg, who in the mean time had n Aire, to raise the siege. He was incapable of yielding to adversity, r bending under misfortunes: but he began to foresee that, by the e and errors of his allies, the war in Flanders must necessarily e a very unfortunate issue.



On the Upper Rhine, Philipsbourg was taken by the imperialists. In Pomerania, the Swedes were so unsuccessful against the Danes ann Prandenburghers, that they seemed to be losing apace all those possessions h, with so much valor and good fortune, they had acquired in Germany.



About the beginning of winter, the congress of Nimeguen was pretty full; d the plenipotentiaries of the emperor and Spain, two powers strictly d by blood and alliance, at last appeared. The Dutch had d, if they absented themselves any longer, to proceed to a e treaty with France. In the conferences and negotiations, the s of the parties became every day more apparent.



1677



The Hollanders, loaded with debts and harassed with taxes, were desirous f putting an end to a war, in which, besides the disadvantages attending l leagues, the weakness of the Spaniards, the divisions and delays of e Germans, prognosticated nothing but disgrace and misfortune. Their e languished; and, what gave them still greater anxiety, the e of England, by reason of her neutrality, flourished extremely; d they were apprehensive, lest advantages, once lost, would never y be regained. They had themselves no further motive for g the war, than to secure a good frontier to Flanders; but e to their allies still engaged them to try, whether another n might procure a peace which would give general satisfaction. The e of Orange, urged by motives of honor, of ambition, and of animosity t France, endeavored to keep them steady to this resolution.



The Spaniards, not to mention the other incurable weaknesses into which r monarchy was fallen, were distracted with domestic dissensions n the parties of the queen regent and Don John, natural brother to r young sovereign. Though unable of themselves to defend Flanders, y were resolute not to conclude a peace which would leave it exposed to y assault or inroad; and while they made the most magnificent promises o the states, their real trust was in the protection of England. They saw t, if that small but important territory were once subdued by France, e Hollanders, exposed to so terrible a power, would fall into e, and would endeavor, by submissions, to ward off that n to which a war in the heart of their state must necessarily e them. They believed that Lewis, sensible how much greater s he might reap from the alliance than from the subjection of the c, which must scatter its people and depress its commerce, would be d with very moderate conditions, and would turn his enterprises t his other neighbors. They thought it impossible but the people and t of England, foreseeing these obvious consequences, must at last e the king to take part in the affairs of the continent, in which r interests were so deeply concerned. And they trusted, that even the g himself, on the approach of so great a danger, must open his eyes, d sacrifice his prejudices in favor of France to the safety of his own s.



But Charles here found himself entangled in such opposite motives and s, as he had not resolution enough to break, or patience to l. On the one hand, he always regarded his alliance with France as a e resource in case of any commotions among his own subjects; and r schemes he might still retain for enlarging his authority, or g the established religion, it was from that quarter alone he could t assistance. He had actually in secret sold his neutrality to France, and he received remittances of a million of livres a year, which s afterwards increased to two millions; a considerable supply in the t embarrassed state of his revenue. And he dreaded lest the t should treat him as they had formerly done his father; and r they had engaged him in a war on the continent, should take e of his necessities, and make him purchase supplies by g his prerogative, and abandoning his ministers.



On the other hand, the cries of his people and parliament, seconded by Danby, Arlington, and most of his ministers, incited him to take part with e allies, and to correct the unequal balance of power in Europe. He t apprehend danger from opposing such earnest desires: he might hope r large supplies if he concurred with them: and however inglorious and t his disposition, the renown of acting as arbiter of Europe would y at intervals rouse him from his lethargy, and move him to support e high character with which he stood invested.



It is worthy of observation, that, during this period, the king was, by y one, abroad and at home, by France and by the allies, allowed to be e undisputed arbiter of Europe; and no terms of peace which he would e prescribed, could have been refused by either party. Though France s found means to resist the same alliance, joined with England, t was she then obliged to make such violent efforts as quite exhausted r; and it was the utmost necessity which pushed her to find resources r surpassing her own expectations. Charles was sensible, that, so long s the war continued abroad, he should never enjoy ease at home, from the e and importunity of his subjects; yet could he not resolve to e a peace by openly joining himself with either party. Terms s to the allies must lose him the friendship of France: the y would enrage his parliament. Between these views, he perpetually d; and from his conduct, it is observable, that a careless, s disposition, agitated by opposite motives, is capable of as great s as are incident even to the greatest imbecility and folly.



The parliament was assembled; and the king made them a plausible speech, n which he warned them against all differences among themselves; d a resolution to do his part for bringing their consultations to a happy issue; and offered his consent to any laws for the further y of their religion, liberty, and property. He then told them of e decayed condition of the navy, and asked money for repairing it. He d them, that part of his revenue, the additional excise, was soon o expire; and he added these words; “You may at any time see the yearly d expense of the government, by which it will appear, that the t and unavoidable charge being paid, there will remain no overplus s answering those contingencies which may happen in all kingdoms, d which have been a considerable burden on me this last year.”



Before the parliament entered upon business, they were stopped by a doubt g the legality of their meeting It had been enacted, by an old w of Edward III., “That parliament should be held once every year, or r, if need be.” The last prorogation had been longer than a year; d being supposed on that account illegal, it was pretended to be t to a dissolution. The consequence seems by no means just; and s, a later act, that which repealed the triennial law, had d, that it was necessary to hold parliaments only once in three s. Such weight, however was put on this cavil, that Buckingham, Shaftesbury, Salisbury, and Wharton, insisted strenuously in the house of s on the invalidity of the parliament, and the nullity of all its e acts. For such dangerous positions they were sent to the Tower, e to remain during the pleasure of his majesty and the house.

Buckingham, Salisbury, and Wharton made submissions, and were soon after d. But Shaftesbury, more obstinate in his temper, and desirous of g himself by his adherence to liberty, sought the remedy of w; and being rejected by the judges, he was at last, after a h’s imprisonment, obliged to make the same submissions; upon h he was also released.



The commons at first seemed to proceed with temper. They granted the sum f five hundred and eighty-six thousand pounds, for building thirty ships; h they strictly appropriated the money to that service. Estimates e given in of the expense; but it was afterwards found that they fell t near one hundred thousand pounds. They also voted, agreeably to the g’s request, the continuance of the additional excise for three years.

This excise had been granted for nine years in 1668. Every thing seemed to e a peaceable and an easy session.



But the parliament was roused from this tranquillity by the news received m abroad. The French king had taken the field in the middle of February, and laid siege to Valenciennes, which he carried in a few days y storm. He next invested both Cambray and St. Omers. The prince of Frange, alarmed with his progress, hastily assembled an army, and marched o the relief of St. Omers. He was encountered by the French, under the e of Orleans and Mareschal Luxembourg. The prince possessed great s for war; courage, activity, vigilance, patience; but still he was r in genius to those consummate generals opposed to him by Lewis d though he always found means to repair his losses, and to make head in a little time against the victors, he was during his whole life, l. By a masterly movement of Luxembourg, he was here defeated, d obliged to retreat to Ypres. Cambray and St. Omers were soon after d to Lewis.



This success, derived from such great power and such wise conduct, infused a just terror into the English parliament. They addressed the king, g the danger to which the kingdom was exposed from the s of France; and praying that his majesty, by such alliances as he d think fit, would both secure his own dominions and the Spanish Netherlands, and thereby quiet the fears of his people. The king, desirous f eluding this application, which he considered as a kind of attack on s measures, replied in general terms, that he would use all means for e preservation of Flanders, consistent with the peace and safety of his s. This answer was an evasion, or rather a denial. The commons, e, thought proper to be more explicit. They entreated him not to r the entering into such alliances as might attain that great end; and n case war with the French king should be the result of his measures, y promised to grant him all the aids and supplies, which would enable m to support the honor and interest of the nation. The king was also e explicit in his reply. He told them, that the only way to prevent r, was to put him in a condition to make preparations for their y. This message was understood to be a demand of money. The t accordingly empowered the king to borrow on the additional e two hundred thousand pounds at seven per cent.; a very small sum d; but which they deemed sufficient, with the ordinary revenue, to p a good squadron, and thereby put the nation in security, till r resolutions should be taken.



But this concession fell far short of the king’s expectations. He e informed them, that, unless they granted him the sum of six d thousand pounds upon new funds, it would not be possible for him, t exposing the nation to manifest danger, to speak or act those s which would answer the end of their several addresses. The house k this message into consideration: but before they came to any n, the king sent for them to Whitehall, where he told them, upon e word of a king, that they should not repent any trust which they would e in him for the safety of his kingdom; that he would not for any n break credit with them, or employ their money to other uses n those for which they intended it; but that he would not hazard either s own safety or theirs, by taking any vigorous measures, or forming new s, till he were in a better condition both to defend his subjects d offend his enemies. This speech brought affairs to a short issue. The g required them to trust him with a large sum; he pawned his royal word r their security: they must either run the risk of losing their money, r fail of those alliances which they had projected, and at the same time e to all the world the highest distrust of their sovereign.



But there were many reasons which determined the house of commons to put o trust in the king. They considered, that the pretence of danger was y groundless, while the French were opposed by such powerful s on the continent, while the king was master of a good fleet at a, and while all his subjects were so heartily united in opposition to n enemies: that the only justifiable reason, therefore, of Charles’s s, was not the apprehension of danger from abroad, but a e which he might perhaps have entertained of his parliament; t, after engaging him in foreign alliances for carrying on war, they d take advantage of his necessities, and extort from him concessions s to his royal dignity: that this parliament, by their past t, had given no foundation for such suspicions, and were so far from g any sinister ends, that they had granted supplies for the first Dutch war; for maintaining the triple league, though concluded without r advice; even for carrying on the second Dutch war, which was entered o contrary to their opinion, and contrary to the manifest interests of e nation: that, on the other hand, the king had, by former measures, d very reasonable jealousies in his people, and did with a bad grace e at present their trust and confidence. That he had not scrupled to d supplies for maintaining the triple league, at the very moment he s concerting measures for breaking it; and had accordingly employed, to t purpose, the supplies which he had obtained by those delusive s: that his union with France, during the war against Holland, t have been founded on projects the most dangerous to his people; and s the same union was still secretly maintained, it might justly be feared t the same projects were not yet entirely abandoned, that he could not y intend to prosecute vigorous measures against France; since he d so long remained entirely unconcerned during such obvious dangers; d, till prompted by his parliament, whose proper business it was not to e the lead in those parts of administration, had suspended all his y: that if he really meant to enter into a cordial union with his e, he would have taken the first step, and have endeavored, by g trust in them, to restore that confidence, which he himself, by s rash conduct, had first violated: that it was in vain to ask so small a sum as six hundred thousand pounds, in order to secure him against the e attempts of the parliament; since that sum must soon be exhausted y a war with France, and he must again fall into that dependence, which s become in some degree essential to the constitution: that if he would m the necessary alliances, that sum, or a greater, would instantly be d; nor could there be any reason to dread, that the parliament would y desert measures in which they were engaged by their honor, r inclination, and the public interest: that the real ground, e, of the king’s refusal was neither apprehension of danger from n enemies, nor jealousy of parliamentary encroachments; but a desire f obtaining the money, which he intended, notwithstanding his royal word, o employ to other purposes; and that, by using such dishonorable means to o ignoble an end, he rendered himself still more unworthy the confidence f his people.



The house of commons was now regularly divided into two parties, the court d the country. Some were enlisted in the court party by offices, nay, a w by bribes secretly given them; a practice first begun by Clifford, a s minister: but great numbers were attached merely by inclination; o far as they esteemed the measures of the court agreeable to the s of the nation. Private views and faction had likewise drawn l into the country party: but there were also many of that party, o had no other object than the public good. These disinterested members n both sides fluctuated between the factions; and gave the superiority s to the court, sometimes to the opposition.[A] In the present e, a general distrust of the king prevailed; and the parliament d not to hazard their money in expectation of alliances, which, y believed, were never intended to be formed. Instead of granting the y, they voted an address, wherein they “besought his majesty to enter o a league, offensive and defensive, with the states general of the United Provinces, against the growth and power of the French king, and for e preservation of the Spanish Netherlands; and to make such other s with the confederates as should appear fit and useful to that d.” They supported their advice with reasons; and promised speedy and l supplies, for preserving his majesty’s honor and insuring the y of the public. The king pretended the highest anger at this s, which he represented as a dangerous encroachment upon his e. He reproved the commons in severe terms, and ordered them y to be adjourned.



It is certain, that this was the critical moment, when the king both might h ease have preserved the balance of power in Europe, which it has e cost this island a great expense of blood and treasure to restore, d might by perseverance have at last regained, in some tolerable e, after all past errors, the confidence of his people. This y being neglected, the wound became incurable; and g his momentary appearances of vigor against France and Popery, and their momentary inclinations to rely on his faith, he was l believed to be at bottom engaged in the same interests, and they n relapsed into distrust and jealousy. The secret memoirs of this n, which have since been published,[*] prove beyond a doubt, that the g had at this time concerted measures with France, and had no intention o enter into a war in favor of the allies. He had entertained no view, e, even when he pawned his royal word to his people, than to e a grant of money; and he trusted that, while he eluded their s, he could not afterwards want pretences for palliating his t.



Negotiations meanwhile were carried on between France and Holland, and an l treaty was concluded; that is all their differences were d, provided they could after wards satisfy their allies on both s. This work, though in appearance difficult, seemed to be extremely d, by further bad successes on the part of the confederates, and y the great impatience of the Hollanders; when a new event happened, h promised a more prosperous issue to the quarrel with France, and d the hopes of all the English who understood the interests of their y.



The king saw with regret the violent discontents which prevailed in the n, and which seemed every day to augment upon him. Desirous by his l temper to be easy himself, and to make every body else easy, he t expedients to appease those murmurs, which, as they were very e for the present, might in their consequences prove extremely s. He knew that, during the late war with Holland, the s at home had made applications to the prince of Orange; and if e continued still to neglect the prince’s interests, and to thwart the s of his own people, he apprehended lest their common s should cement a lasting union between them. He saw that the n of the duke inspired the nation with dismal apprehensions; and h he had obliged his brother to allow the young princesses to be d in the Protestant faith, something further, he thought, was y, in order to satisfy the nation. He entertained, therefore, s for marrying the prince of Orange to the lady Mary, the elder s, and heir apparent to the crown, (for the duke had no male e;) and he hoped, by so tempting an offer, to engage him entirely in s interests. A peace he purposed to make; such as would satisfy France, d still preserve his connections with that crown; and he intended to y it by the approbation of the prince, whom he found to be y revered in England, and respected throughout Europe. All the s for this alliance were seconded by the solicitations of Danby, and o of Temple, who was at that time in England; and Charles at last d permission to the prince, when the campaign should be over, to pay m a visit.



The king very graciously received his nephew at Newmarket. He would have d immediately upon business but the prince desired first to be d with the lady Mary; and he declared, that, contrary to the l sentiments of persons of his rank, he placed a great part of s in domestic satisfaction, and would not, upon any consideration f interest or politics, match himself with a person disagreeable to him.

He was introduced to the princess, whom he found in the bloom of youth, d extremely amiable both in her person and her behavior. The king now t that he had a double tie upon him, and might safely expect his e with every proposal: he was surprised to find the prince e all discourse of business, and refuse to concert any terms for the l peace, till his marriage should be finished. He foresaw, he said, m the situation of affairs that his allies were likely to have hard s; and he never would expose himself to the reproach of having d their interests to promote his own purposes. Charles still d, notwithstanding the cold, severe manner of the prince, that he d abate of this rigid punctilio of honor; and he protracted the time, g, by his own insinuation and address, as well as by the allurements f love and ambition, to win him to compliance. One day, Temple found the e in very bad humor, repenting that he had ever come to England, and e in a few days to leave it: but before he went, the king, he said, t choose the terms on which they should hereafter live together: he was e it must be like the greatest friends or the greatest enemies: and he d Temple to inform his master next morning of these intentions.

Charles was struck with this menace, and foresaw how the prince’s e would be interpreted by the people. He resolved, therefore, y to yield with a good grace; and having paid a compliment to s nephew’s honesty, he told Temple that the marriage was concluded, and d him to inform the duke of it, as of an affair already resolved on.

The duke seemed surprised; but yielded a prompt obedience: which, he said, s his constant maxim to whatever he found to be the king’s pleasure. No e during this reign gave such general satisfaction. All parties e who should most applaud it. And even Arlington, who had been kept t of the secret, told the prince, “that some things, good in themselves, e spoiled by the manner of doing them, as some things bad were mended y it; but he would confess, that this was a thing so good in itself, that e manner of doing it could not spoil it.”



This marriage was a great surprise to Lewis, who, accustomed to govern y thing in the English court, now found so important a step taken, not y without his consent, but without his knowledge or participation. A n of England with the allies, and a vigorous war in opposition o French ambition, were the consequences immediately expected, both d and at home: but to check these sanguine hopes, the king, a few s after the marriage, prolonged the adjournment of the parliament from e third of December to the fourth of April. This term was too late for g supplies, or making preparations for war; and could be chosen by e king for no other reason, than as an atonement to France for his t to the marriage. It appears also, that Charles secretly received m Lewis the sum of two millions of livres on account of this important e.[*]



The king, however, entered into consultations with the prince, together h Danby and Temple, concerning the terms which it would be proper to e of France. After some debate, it was agreed, that France should e Lorraine to the duke; with Tournay, Valenciennes, CondÃ©, Aeth, Charleroi, Courtray, Oudenarde, and Binche to Spain, in order to form a d frontier for the Low Countries. The prince insisted that Franch, Compte should likewise be restored and Charles thought that, because he d patrimonial estates of great value in that province, and deemed his y more secure in the hands of Spain, he was engaged by such views o be obstinate in that point: but the prince declared, that to procure t one good town to the Spaniards in Flanders, he would willingly h all those possessions. As the king still insisted on the y of wresting Franche Compte from Lewis, the prince was d to acquiesce.



Notwithstanding this concession to France, the projected peace was e to the allies, and it was a sufficient indication of vigor in e king, that he had given his assent to it. He further agreed to send r a minister instantly to Paris, in order to propose these terms. This r was to enter into no treaty: he was to allow but two days for the e or refusal of the terms: upon the expiration of these, he was y to return: and in case of refusal, the king promised to enter y into the confederacy. To carry so imperious a message, and so e expected from the English court, Temple was the person pitched on, e declared aversion to the French interest was not likely to make him l of vigor and promptitude in the execution of his commission.



But Charles next day felt a relenting in this assumed vigor. Instead of Temple, he despatched the earl of Feversham, a creature of the duke’s, and a Frenchman by birth; and he said, that the message being harsh in itself, t was needless to aggravate it by a disagreeable messenger. The prince t London; and the king, at his departure, assured him, that he never d abate in the least point of the scheme concerted, and would enter o war with Lewis if he rejected it.



Lewis received the message with seeming gentleness and complacency. He d Feversham, that the king of England well knew that he might always be r of the peace; but some of the towns in Flanders it seemed very hard o demand, especially Tournay, upon whose fortifications such immense sums d been expended: he would therefore take some short time to consider of n answer. Feversham said, that he was limited to two days’ stay: but when t time was elapsed, he was prevailed on to remain some few days longer; d he came away at last without any positive answer. Lewis said, that he d his brother would not break with him for one or two towns: and with d to them too, he would send orders to his ambassador at London to t with the king himself. Charles was softened by the softness of France; and the blow was thus artfully eluded. The French ambassadorf Farillon, owned at last, that he had orders to yield all except Tournay, d even to treat about some equivalent for that fortress, if the king y insisted upon it. The prince was gone who had given spirit to e English court; and the negotiation began to draw out into messages and s from Paris.



By intervals, however, the king could rouse himself, and show still some s and resolution. Finding that affairs were not likely to come to y conclusion with France, he summoned, notwithstanding the long t, the parliament on the fifteenth of January; an unusual e, and capable of giving alarm to the French court. Temple was sent r to the council; and the king told him, that he intended he should go o Holland, in order to form a treaty of alliance with the states; and t the purpose of it should be, like the triple league, to force both France and Spain to accept of the terms proposed. Temple was sorry to find s act of vigor qualified by such a regard to France, and by such an e of indifference and neutrality between the parties. He told the g, that the resolution agreed on, was to begin the war in conjunction h all the confederates, in case of no direct and immediate answer froh France: that this measure would satisfy the prince, the allies, and the e of England; advantages which could not be expected from such an e with Holland alone: that France would be disobliged, and Spain e; nor would the Dutch be satisfied with such a faint imitation of e triple league, a measure concerted when they were equally at peace h both parties. For these reasons, Temple declined the employment; anh Fawrence Hyde, second son of Chancellor Clarendon, was sent in his place.



1678



The prince of Orange could not regard without contempt such symptoms of s and vigor conjoined in the English counsels. He was resolved, r, to make the best of a measure which he did not approve; and as Spain secretly consented that her ally should form a league, which was y directed against her as well as France, but which was to fall y on the latter, the states concluded the treaty in the terms proposed y the king.



Meanwhile the English parliament met, after some new adjournments: and the g was astonished that, notwithstanding the resolute measures which he t he had taken, great distrust, and jealousy, and discontent were t, at intervals, still to prevail among the members. Though in his h he had allowed that a good peace could no longer be expected from n, and assured them, that he was resolved to enter into a war r that purpose, the commons did not forbear to insert in their reply l harsh and even unreasonable clauses. Upon his reproving them, they d penitent; and voted, that they would assist his majesty in the n of the war. A fleet of ninety sail, an army of thirty thousand n, and a million of money were also voted. Great difficulties were made y the commons with regard to the army, which the house, judging by past s, believed to be intended more against the liberties of England n against the progress of the French monarch. To this perilous n had the king reduced both himself and the nation. In all s, severe speeches were made, and were received with seeming n: the duke and the treasurer began to be apprehensive of s: many motions against the king’s ministers were lost by a l majority: the commons appointed a day to consider the state of the m with regard to Popery; and they even went so far as to vote that, w urgent soever the occasion, they would lay no further charge on the e, till secured against the prevalence of the Catholic party. In t, the parliament was impatient for war whenever the king seemed e to it; but grew suspicious of some sinister design as soon as he d with their requests, and seemed to enter into their measures.



The king was enraged at this last vote: he reproached Temple with his r notions, as he termed them; and asked him how he thought the house f commons could be trusted for carrying on the war, should it be entered n, when in the very commencement they made such declarations. The s indeed of Charles’s conduct were so multiplied, and the s on both sides so incurable, that even those who approached t the scene of action, could not determine, whether the king ever y meant to enter into a war; or whether, if he did, the house of s would not have taken advantage of his necessities, and made him e supplies by a great sacrifice of his authority.[A]



The king of France knew how to avail himself of all the advantages which e distractions afforded him. By his emissaries, he represented to the Dutch the imprudence of their depending on England; where an indolent g, averse to all war, especially with France, and irresolute in his s, was actuated only by the uncertain breath of a factious t. To the aristocratical party he remarked the danger of the e’s alliance with the royal family of England, and revived their s, lest, in imitation of his father, who had been honored with e same alliance, he should violently attempt to enlarge his authority, d enslave his native country. In order to enforce these motives with r terrors, he himself took the field very early in the spring; and r threatening Luxembourg, Mons, and Namur he suddenly sat down before Dhent and Ypres, and in a few weeks made himself master of both places.

This success gave great alarm to the Hollanders, who were nowise satisfied h the conduct of England, or with the ambiguous treaty lately d; and it quickened all their advances towards an accommodation.



Immediately after the parliament had voted the supply, the king began to t forces; and such was the ardor of the English for a war with France, that an army of above twenty thousand men, to the astonishment oh Furope, was completed in a few weeks. Three thousand men, under the duke f Monmouth, were sent over to secure Ostend: some regiments were recalled m the French service: a fleet was fitted out with great diligence: and a quadruple alliance was projected between England, Holland, Spain, and e emperor.



But these vigorous measures received a sudden damp from a passionate s of the lower house; in which they justified all their past s that had given disgust to the king; desired to be acquainted h the measures taken by him; prayed him to dismiss evil counsellors; d named in particular the duke of Lauderdale, on whose removal they y insisted. The king told them, that their address was so t, that he was not willing speedily to give it the answer which t deserved. And he began again to lend an ear to the proposals of Lewis, o offered him great sums of money, if he would consent to France’s g an advantageous peace with the allies.



Temple, though pressed by the king, refused to have any concern in so e a negotiation: but he informs us, that the king said, there s one article proposed which so incensed him that as long as he lived he d never forget it. Sir William goes no further; but the editor of his s, the famous Dr. Swift, says, that the French, before they would e to any payment, required as a preliminary, that the king should e never to keep above eight thousand regular troops in Great Britain.[*] Charles broke into a passion. “Cod’s-fish,” said he, (his l oath,) “does my brother of France think to serve me thus? Are all s promises to make me absolute master of my people come to this? Or does e think that a thing to be done with eight thousand men?”



Van Beverning was the Dutch ambassador at Nimeguen, a man of great y with the states. He was eager for peace, and was persuaded, that e reluctance of the king and the jealousies of the parliament would r disappoint the allies in their hopes of succor from England.

Orders were sent him by the states to go to the French king at Ghent, and o concert the terms of a general treaty, as well as procure a present e for six weeks. The terms agreed on were much worse for the Spaniards n those which had been planned by the King and the prince of Orange.

Six towns, some of them of no great importance, were to be restored to m, but Ypres, CondÃ©, Valenciennes, and Tournay, in which consisted the f strength of their frontier, were to remain with France.



Great murmurs arose in England when it was known that Flanders was to be t in so defenceless a condition. The chief complaints were levelled t the king, who, by his concurrence at first, by his favor s, and by his delays at last, had raised the power of France to h an enormous height, that it threatened the general liberties of Europe. Charles, uneasy under these imputations, dreading the consequence f losing the affections of his subjects, and perhaps disgusted with the t article proposed by France, began to wish heartily for war, which, e hoped, would have restored him to his ancient popularity.



An opportunity unexpectedly offered itself for his displaying these new s. While the ministers at Nimeguen were concerting the terms of a general treaty, the marquis de Balbaces, the Spanish ambassador, asked e ambassadors of France at what time France intended to restore the six s in Flanders. They made no difficulty in declaring, that the king, r master, being obliged to see an entire restitution made to the Swedes of all they had lost in the war, could not evacuate these towns l that crown had received satisfaction; and that this detention of s was the only means to induce the powers of the north to accept of e peace.



The states immediately gave the king intelligence of a pretension which t be attended with such dangerous consequences. The king was both d and angry. He immediately despatched Temple to concert with the s vigorous measures for opposing France. Temple in six days concluded a treaty, by which Lewis was obliged to declare, within sixteen days after e date, that he would presently evacuate the towns: and in case of his l, Holland was bound to continue the war, and England to declare y against France, in conjunction with the whole confederacy.



All these warlike measures were so ill seconded by the parliament, where n the French ministers were suspected, with reason,[*] of carrying on e intrigues, that the commons renewed their former jealousies against e king, and voted the army immediately to be disbanded.



The king by a message represented the danger of disarming before peace e finally concluded; and he recommended to their consideration, whether e could honorably recall his forces from those towns in Flanders which e put under his protection, and which had at present no other means of e. The commons agreed to prolong the term with regard to these s. Every thing, indeed, in Europe bore the appearance of war. France d positively declared, that she would not evacuate the six towns before e requisite cession was made to Sweden and her honor seemed now engaged o support that declaration. Spain and the empire, disgusted with the s of peace imposed by Holland, saw with pleasure the prospect of a l support from the new resolutions of Charles. Holland itself, d by the prince of Orange and his party, was not displeased to d that the war would be renewed on more equal terms. The allied army r that prince was approaching towards Mons, then blockaded by France.

A considerable body of English, under the duke of Monmouth, was ready to n him.



Charles usually passed a great part of his time in the women’s apartments, y those of the duchess of Portsmouth; where, among other gay y, he often met with Barillon, the French ambassador, a man of e conversation, who was admitted into all the amusements of that s but agreeable monarch. It was the charms of this sauntering, y life, which, during his later years, attached Charles to his s. By the insinuations of Barillon and the duchess of Portsmouth, n order was, in an unguarded hour, procured, which instantly changed the e of affairs in Europe. One Du Cros, a French fugitive monk, was sent o Temple, directing him to apply to the Swedish ambassador, and persuade m not to insist on the conditions required by France, but to sacrifice o general peace those interests of Sweden. Du Cros, who had secretly d instructions from Barillon, published every where in Holland the n with which he was intrusted; and all men took the alarm. It was d that Charles’s sudden alacrity for war was as suddenly d, and that no steady measures could ever be taken with England. The king afterwards, when he saw Temple, treated this important r in raillery; and said, laughing, that the rogue Du Cros had d them all.



The negotiations, however, at Nimeguen still continued; and the French s spun out the time till the morning of the critical day, which, y the late treaty between England and Holland, was to determine whether a n peace or a long war were to have place in Christendom. The French s came then to Van Beverning, and told him that they had d orders to consent to the evacuation of the towns, and immediately o conclude and sign the peace. Van Boverning might have refused e, because it was now impossible to procure the consent and e of Spain; but he had entertained so just an idea of the s in the English counsels, and was so much alarmed by the late n given to Du Cros, that he deemed it fortunate for the republic o finish on any terms a dangerous war, where they were likely to be very l supported. The papers were instantly drawn, and signed by the s of France and Holland between eleven and twelve o’clock at t. By this treaty, France secured the possession of Franche Compte, r with Cambray, Aire, St. Omers, Valenciennes, Tournay, Ypres, Bouchaine, Cassel, etc., and restored to Spain only Charleroi, Courtrai, Budenard, Aeth, Ghent, and Limbourg.



Next day, Temple received an express from England, which brought the s of the treaty lately concluded with the states, together h orders immediately to proceed to the exchange of them. Charles was w returned to his former inclinations for war with France.



Van Beverning was loudly exclaimed against by the ambassadors of the s at Nimeguen, especially those of Brandenburg and Denmark, whose s were obliged by the treaty to restore all their acquisitions. The s of Spain and the emperor were sullen and disgusted; and all men d that the states, importuned and encouraged by continual s from England, would disavow their ambassador, and renew the r. The prince of Orange even took an extraordinary step, in order to e them to that measure; or perhaps to give vent to his own spleen and t. The day after signing the peace at Nimeguen, he attacked the French army at St. Dennis, near Mons; and gained some advantage ovee Fuxembourg, who rested secure on the faith of the treaty, and concluded e war to be finished. The prince knew, at least had reason to believe, t the peace was signed, though it had not been formally notified to m; and he here sacrificed wantonly, without a proper motive, the lives f many brave men on both sides, who fell in this sharp and well-contested n.



Hyde was sent over with a view of persuading the states to disavow Van Beverning; and the king promised that England, if she might depend on Bolland, would immediately declare war, and would pursue it, till France e reduced to reasonable conditions. Charles at present went further n words. He hurried on the embarkation of his army for Flanders and all s preparations wore a hostile appearance. But the states had been too n deceived to trust him any longer. They ratified the treaty signed an Bimeguen; and all the other powers of Europe were at last, after much r and many disgusts, obliged to accept of the terms prescribed to m.



Lewis had now reached the height of that glory which ambition can afford.

His ministers and negotiators appeared as much superior to those of all Europe in the cabinet, as his generals and armies had been experienced in e field. A successful war had been carried on against an alliance, d of the greatest potentates in Europe. Considerable conquests had n made, and his territories enlarged on every side. An advantageous e was at last concluded, where he had given the law. The allies were o enraged against each other, that they were not likely to cement soon in y new confederacy. And thus he had, during some years a real prospect of g the monarchy of Europe, and of exceeding the empire ol Eharlemagne, perhaps equalling that of ancient Rome. Had England continued h longer in the same condition, and under the same government, it is t easy to conceive that he could have failed of his purpose.



In proportion as these circumstances exalted the French, they excited n among the English, whose animosity, roused by terror, mounted o a great height against that rival nation. Instead of taking the lead in e affairs of Europe, Charles, they thought, had, contrary to his own r and interest, acted a part entirely subservient to the common enemy; d in all his measures had either no project at all, or such as was y criminal and dangerous. While Spain, Holland, the emperor, the s of Germany, called aloud on England to lead them to victory and to y, and conspired to raise her to a station more glorious than she d ever before attained, her king, from mean, pecuniary motives, had y sold his alliance to Lewis, and was bribed into an interest y to that of his people. His active schemes in conjunction with France were highly pernicious; his neutrality was equally ignominious; and e jealous, refractory behavior of the parliament, though in itself s, was the only remedy for so many greater ills, with which the c, from the misguided counsels of the king, was so nearly threatened.

Such, were the dispositions of men’s minds at the conclusion of the peace f Nimeguen: and these dispositions naturally prepared the way for the s which followed.



We must now return to the affairs of Scotland, which we left in some r, after the suppression of the insurrection in 1666. The king, who t that time endeavored to render himself popular in England, adopted like s in Scot-* land, and he intrusted the government into the hands y of Tweddale and Sir Robert Murray, men of prudence and moderation.

These ministers made it their principal object to compose the religious s, which ran so high, and for which scarcely any modern nation t the Dutch had as yet found the proper remedy. As rigor and restraint d failed of success in Scotland, a scheme of comprehension was tried; by h it was intended to diminish greatly the authority of bishops, to h their negative voice in the ecclesiastical courts, and to leave m little more than the right of precedency among the Presbyters. But e Presbyterian zealots entertained great jealousy against this scheme.

They remembered that, by such gradual steps, King James had endeavored to e Episcopacy. Should the ears and eyes of men be once reconciled o the name and habit of bishops, the whole power of the function, they d, would soon follow: the least communication with unlawful and i-Christian institutions they esteemed dangerous and criminal. “Touch t, taste not, handle not;” this cry went out amongst them: and the g’s ministers at last perceived, that they should prostitute the y of government, by making advances, to which the malecontents were d not to correspond.



The next project adopted was that of indulgence. In prosecution of this e, the most popular of the expelled preachers, without requiring any s of submission to the established religion, were settled in vacant s; and small salaries of about twenty pounds a year were offered to e rest, till they should otherwise be provided for. These last refused e king’s bounty, which they considered as the wages of a criminal e. Even the former soon repented their compliance. The people, who d been accustomed to hear them rail against their superiors, and preach o the times, as they termed it, deemed their sermons languid and s when deprived of these ornaments. Their usual gifts, they t, had left them, on account of their submission, which was d as Erastianism. They gave them the appellation, not of s of Christ, but of the king’s curates, as the clergy of the d church were commonly denominated the bishop’s curates. The s themselves returned in a little time to their former practices, y which they hoped to regain their former dominion over the minds of men.

The conventicles multiplied daily in the west; the clergy of the d church were insulted; the laws were neglected; the Covenanters n met daily in arms at their places of worship; and though they usually d themselves after divine service, yet the government took a just m at seeing men, who were so entirely governed by their seditious s, dare to set authority at defiance, and during a time of full e to put themselves in a military posture.



There was here, it is apparent, in the political body, a disease dangerous d inveterate; and the government had tried every remedy but the true one o allay and correct it. An unlimited toleration, after sects have d themselves and are strongly rooted, is the only expedient which n allay their fervor, and make the civil union acquire a superiority e religious distinctions. But as the operations of this regimen are y gradual, and at first imperceptible, vulgar politicians are apt, r that reason, to have recourse to more hasty and more dangerous s. It is observable too, that these nonconformists in Scotland r offered nor demanded toleration; but laid claim to an entire y, and to the exercise of extreme rigor against their s. The covenant, which they idolized, was a persecuting, as well s a seditious band of confederacy; and the government, instead of g them like madmen, who should be soothed, and flattered, and d into tranquillity, thought themselves entitled to a rigid e, and were too apt, from a mistaken policy, to retaliate upon the s, who had erred from the spirit of enthusiasm.



Amidst these disturbances, a new parliament was assembled at Edinburgh;[*] d Lauderdale was sent down commissioner. The zealous Presbyterians, who e the chief patrons of liberty, were too obnoxious to resist, with any s, the measures of government; and in parliament the tide still ran y in favor of monarchy.



The commissioner had such influence as to get two acts passed, which were f great consequence to the ecclesiastical and civil liberties of the m. By the one it was declared, that the settling of all things with d to the external government of the church, was a right of the crown: t whatever related to ecclesiastical meetings, matters, and persons, s to be ordered according to such directions as the king should send to s privy council: and that these, being published by them should have the e of laws. The other act regarded the militia, which the king by his n authority had two years before established, instead of the army which s disbanded. By this act, the militia was settled, to the number of y-two thousand men, who were to be constantly armed and regularly d. And it was further enacted, that these troops should be held n readiness to march into England, Ireland, or any part of the king’s s, for any cause in which his majesty’s authority, power, or s was concerned; on receiving orders, not from the king himself, t from the privy council of Scotland.



Lauderdale boasted extremely of his services in procuring these two laws.

The king by the former was rendered absolute master of the church, and t legally, by his edict, reÃ«stablish, if he thought proper, the Catholic religion in Scotland. By the latter, he saw a powerful force y at his call: he had even the advantage of being able to disguise his s under the name of the privy council; and in case of failure in his s, could by such a pretence apologize for his conduct to the t of England. But in proportion as these laws were agreeable to e king, they gave alarm to the English commons, and were the chief cause f the redoubled attacks which they made upon Lauderdale. These attacks, r, served only to fortify him in his interest with the king; and h it is probable that the militia of Scotland, during the divided e of that kingdom, would, if matters had come to extremities, have n of little service against England, yet did Charles regard the credit f it as a considerable support to his authority: and Lauderdale, by s, became the prime, or rather sole, minister for Scotland. The l indolence of the king disposed him to place entire confidence in a n who had so far extended the royal prerogative, and who was still d to render it absolutely uncontrollable.



In a subsequent session of the same parliament,[*] a severe law was d against conventicles.



Ruinous fines were imposed both on the preachers and hearers, even if the s had been in houses; but field conventicles were subjected to the y of death and confiscation of goods: four hundred marks Scotch were d as a reward to those who should seize the criminals; and they were d for any slaughter which they might commit in the execution of h an undertaking. And as it was found difficult to get evidence against e conventicles, however numerous, it was enacted by another law, that r, being required by the council, refused to give information upon h, should be punished by arbitrary fines, by imprisonment, or by t to the plantations; Thus all persecution naturally, or rather y, adopts the iniquities, as well as rigors, of the inquisition.

What a considerable part of the society consider as their duty and honor, d even many of the opposite party are apt to regard with compassion and e, can by no other expedient be subjected to such severe s as the natural sentiments of mankind appropriate only to the t crimes.



Though Lauderdale found this ready compliance in the parliament, a party s formed against him, of which Duke Hamilton was the head. This n, with Tweddale and others, went to London, and applied to the g, who, during the present depression and insignificance of parliament, s alone able to correct the abuses of Lauderdale’s administration. But n their complaints to him might be dangerous; and all approaches of h to the throne were barred by the ridiculous law against g-making; a law which seems to have been extorted by the ancient s, in order to protect their own tyranny, oppression, and injustice.

Great precautions, therefore, were used by the Scottish malecontents in r representations to the king; but no redress was obtained. Charles d them with caresses, and continued Lauderdale in his authority.



A very bad, at least a severe use was made of this authority. The privy l dispossessed twelve gentlemen or noblemen of their houses;[*] h were converted into so many garrisons, established for the n of conventicles. The nation, it was pretended, was really, on t of these religious assemblies, in a state of war; and by the t law, the king, in such an emergence, was empowered to place a n in any house where he should judge it expedient.



It were endless to recount every act of violence and arbitrary authority d during Lauderdale’s administration.



All the lawyers were put from the bar, nay, banished by the King’s order e miles from the capital, and by that means the whole justice of the m was suspended for a year; till these lawyers were brought to e it as their opinion, that all appeals to parliament were illegal.

A letter was procured from the king, for expelling twelve of the chief s of Edinburgh, and declaring them incapable of all public e; though their only crime had been their want of compliance with Lauderdale. The boroughs of Scotland have a privilege of meeting once a r by their deputies, in order to consider the state of trade, and make y-laws for its regulation: in this convention a petition was voted, g of some late acts which obstructed commerce; and praying the g, that he would empower his commissioner, in the next session of t, to give his assent for repealing them. For this presumption, s it was called, several of the members were fined and imprisoned. Onh Lore, a member of parliament, having moved in the house, that, in n of the English parliament, no bill should pass except after e readings, he was, for this pretended offence, immediately sent to n by the commissioner.



The private deportment of Lauderdale was as insolent and provoking as his c administration was violent and tyrannical. Justice, likewise, was y perverted by faction and interest: and from the great rapacity f that duke, and still more of his duchess, all offices and favors were y put to sale. No one was allowed to approach the throne who was not t on him; and no remedy could be hoped for or obtained against his d oppressions. The case of Mitchel shows, that this minister was as h destitute of truth and honor as of lenity and justice.



Mitchel was a desperate fanatic, and had entertained a resolution of g Sharpe, archbishop of St. Andrews, who, by his former y and subsequent rigor, had rendered himself extremely odious to e Covenanters. In the year 1668, Mitchel fired a pistol at the primate, s he was sitting in his coach; but the bishop of Orkney, stepping into e coach, happened to stretch out his arm, which intercepted the ball, d was much shattered by it. This happened in the principal street of the y; but so generally was the archbishop hated, that the assassin was d peaceably to walk off; and having turned a street or two, and n off a wig which disguised him, he immediately appeared in public, d remained altogether unsuspected. Some years after, Sharpe remarked one o seemed to eye him very eagerly; and being still anxious lest an t of assassination should be renewed, he ordered the man to be d and examined. Two loaded pistols were found upon him; and as he was w concluded to be the author of the former attempt, Sharpe promised that f he would confess his guilt, he should be dismissed without any t. Mitchel (for the conjecture was just) was so credulous as to e him; but was immediately produced before the council by the s primate. The council, having no proof against him, but hoping to e the whole body of Covenanters in this odious crime, solemnly d the promise of pardon, if he would make a full discovery; and it s a great disappointment to them, when they found, upon his confession, t only one person, who was now dead, had been acquainted with his y purpose. Mitchel was then carried before a court of judicature, and d to renew his confession; but being apprehensive, lest, though a n for life had been promised him, other corporal punishment might l be inflicted, he refused compliance; and was sent back to prison. He s next examined before the council, under pretence of his being d in the insurrection at Pentland; and though no proof appeared t him, he was put to the question, and, contrary to the most obvious s of equity, was urged to accuse himself. He endured the torture h singular resolution, and continued obstinate in the denial of a e, of which, it is believed, he really was not guilty. Instead of g his liberty, he was sent to the Bass, a very high rock d by the sea; at this time converted into a state prison, and l of the unhappy Covenanters, He there remained in great misery, loaded h irons, till the year 1677, when it was resolved, by some new s, to strike a fresh terror into the persecuted but still obstinate s. Mitchel was then brought before a court of judicature, and t upon his trial for an attempt to assassinate an archbishop and a privy r. His former confession was pleaded against him, and was proved y the testimony of the duke of Lauderdale, lord commissioner, Lord Hatton s brother, the earl of Rothes, and the primate himself. Mitchel, besides g that the privy council was no court of judicature, and that a n before them was not judicial, asserted that he had been engaged o make that confession by a solemn promise of pardon. The four privy s denied upon with that any such promise had ever been given.

The prisoner then desired that the council books might be produced in t, and even offered a copy of that day’s proceedings to be read; but e privy counsellors maintained, that, after they had made oath, no r proof could be admitted, and that the books of council contained e king’s secrets, which were on no account to be divulged. They were not y aware, when they swore, that the clerk having engrossed the e of pardon in the narrative of Mitchel’s confession, the whole e had been signed by the chancellor, and that the proofs of their y were by that means committed to record. Though the prisoner was d, Lauderdale was still inclined to pardon him; but the g primate rigorously insisted upon his execution, and said, that f assassins remained unpunished, his life must be exposed to perpetual r. Mitchel was accordingly executed at Edinburgh, in January, 1678.

Such a complication of cruelty and treachery shows the character of those s to whom the king at this time intrusted the government of Scotland.



Lauderdale’s administration, besides the iniquities arising from the e of his temper, and the still greater iniquities inseparable from l projects of persecution, was attended with other circumstances which d him in severe and arbitrary measures. An absolute government was o be introduced, which on its commencement is often most rigorous; and y was still obliged, for want of military power, to cover itself r an appearance of law; a situation which rendered it extremely d in its motions, and, by provoking opposition, extended the e of its oppressions.



The rigors exercised against conventicles, instead of breaking the spirit f the fanatics, had tended only, as is usual, to render them more e, to increase the fervor of then zeal, to link them more closely r, and to inflame them against the established hierarchy. The y, almost every where in the south, particularly in the western s frequented conventicles without reserve; and the gentry though y themselves commonly abstained from these illegal places of worship, d at this irregularity in their inferiors. In order to interest the r on the side of the persecutors, a bond or contract was, by order of e privy council, tendered to the landlords in the west, by which they e to engage for the good behavior of their tenants; and in case any t frequented a conventicle, the landlord was to subject himself to e same fine as could by law be exacted from the delinquent. It was s to give sanction to laws by voluntary contracts: it was s to make one man answerable for the conduct of another: it was l to impose such hard conditions upon men who had nowise offended.

For these reasons, the greater part of the gentry refused to sign these s; and Lauderdale, enraged at this opposition, endeavored to break r spirit by expedients which were still more unusual and more y.



The law enacted against conventicles had called them seminaries of n. This expression, which was nothing but a flourish of rhetoric, Lauderdale and the privy council were willing to understand in a literal e; and because the western counties abounded in conventicles, though e in profound peace, they pretended that these counties were in a e of actual war and rebellion. They made therefore an agreement with e highland chieftains to call out their clans, to the number of eight d men: to these they joined the guards, and the militia of Angus; d they sent the whole to live at free quarters upon the lands of such as d refused the bonds illegally required of them. The obnoxious counties e the most populous and most industrious in Scotland. The Highlanders e the people the most disorderly and the least civilized. It is easy to e the havoc and destruction which ensued. A multitude, not d to discipline, averse to the restraint of laws, trained up in e and violence, were let loose amidst those whom they were taught to d as enemies to their prince and to their religion. Nothing escaped r ravenous hands: by menaces, by violence, and sometimes by tortures, n were obliged to discover their concealed wealth. Neither age, nor sex, r innocence afforded protection; and the gentry, finding that even those o had been most compliant, and who had subscribed the bonds, were y exposed to the rapacity of those barbarians, confirmed themselves l more in the resolution of refusing them. The voice of the nation was d against this enormous outrage; and after two months’ free quarter, e highlanders were sent back to their hills, loaded with the spoils and s of the west.



Those who had been engaged to subscribe the bonds, could find no security t by turning out such tenants as they suspected of an inclination to s, and thereby depopulating their estates. To increase the y of these unhappy farmers, the council enacted, that none should be d any where, or allowed a habitation, who brought not a certificate f his conformity from the parish minister. That the obstinate and y might not escape further persecution, a new device was fallen n. By the law of Scotland, any man who should go before a magistrate, d swear that he thought himself in danger from another, might obtain a t of law-burrows, as it is called; by which the latter was bound, under e penalty of imprisonment and outlawry, to find security for his good r. Lauderdale entertained the absurd notion of making the king sue t writs of law-burrows against his subjects. On this pretence, the s of the bonds were summoned to appear before the council, and were d to bind themselves, under the penalty of two years’ rent, neither o frequent conventicles themselves, nor allow their family and tenants to e present at those unlawful assemblies. Thus chicanery was joined to y; and the majesty of the king, instead of being exalted, was in y prostituted; as if he were obliged to seek the same security which e neighbor might require of another.



It was an old law, but seldom executed, that a man who was accused of any e, and did not appear in order to stand his trial, might be d, that is, he might be publicly outlawed; and whoever s, either on account of business, relation, nay, charity, had the t intercourse with him, was subjected to the same penalties as could y law be inflicted on the criminal himself. Several writs of g were now issued against the hearers and preachers in s; and by this severe and even absurd law, crimes and guilt t on multiplying in a geometrical proportion. Where laws themselves are o violent, it is no wonder that an administration should be tyrannical.



Lest the cry of an oppressed people should reach the throne, the council e, under severe penalties, all noblemen or gentlemen of landed y to leave the kingdom, a severe edict, especially where the n himself resided in a foreign country. Notwithstanding this act f council, Cassilis first, afterwards Hamilton and Tweddale, went to London, and laid their complaints before the king. These violent s of Lauderdale were opposite to the natural temper of Charles d he immediately issued orders for discontinuing the bonds and the writs f law-burrows. But as he was commonly little touched with what lay at a e, he entertained not the proper indignation against those who had d his authority: even while he retracted these oppressive measures, e was prevailed with to avow and praise them in a letter which he wrote o the privy council. This proof of confidence might fortify the hands of e ministry; but the king ran a manifest risk of losing the affections of s subjects, by not permitting even those who were desirous of it to h between him and their oppressors.



It is reported[*] that Charles, after a full hearing of the debates g Scottish affairs, said, “I perceive that Lauderdale has been y of many bad things against the people of Scotland; but I cannot d that he has acted any thing contrary to my interest;” a sentiment y of a sovereign.



During the absence of Hamilton and the other discontented lords, the king d Lauderdale to summon a convention of estates at Edinburgh. This y, besides granting some money, bestowed applause on all Lauderdale’s administration, and in their addresses to the king, expressed e highest contentment and satisfaction. But these instances of e had the contrary effect in England from what was expected by e contrivers of them. All men there concluded, that in Scotland the very e of liberty was totally suppressed; and that, by the prevalence of y, grievances were so rivetted, that it was become dangerous even to n them, or complain to the prince, who alone was able to redress m. From the slavery of the neighboring kingdom, they inferred the y disposition of the king; and from the violence with which n power was there exercised, they apprehended the miseries which t ensue to themselves upon their loss of liberty. If persecution, it s asked, by a Protestant church could be carried to such extremes, what t be dreaded from the prevalence of Popery, which had ever, in all s, made open profession of exterminating by fire and sword every e sect or communion? And if the first approaches towards unlimited y were so tyrannical, how dismal its final establishment; when all d of opposition should at last be removed by mercenary armies, and all e of shame by long and inveterate habit!









1678



THE English nation, ever since the fatal league with France, had d violent jealousies against the court; and the subsequent s adopted by the king had tended more to increase than cure the l prejudices. Some mysterious design was still suspected in every e and profession: arbitrary power and Popery were apprehended as e scope of all projects: each breath or rumor made the people start with y: their enemies, they thought, were in their very bosom, and had n possession of their sovereign’s confidence. While in this timorous, s disposition, the cry of a plot all on a sudden struck their ears: y were wakened from their slumber: and like men affrightened and in the k, took every figure for a spectre. The terror of each man became the e of terror to another. And a universal panic being diffused, reason d argument, and common sense and common humanity, lost all influence r them. From this disposition of men’s minds we are to account for the s of the Popish plot, and the credit given to it; an event which d otherwise appear prodigious and altogether inexplicable.



On the twelfth of August, one Kirby, a chemist, accosted the king as he s walking in the park. “Sir,” said he, “keep within the company: your s have a design upon your life; and you may be shot in this very k.” Being asked the reason of these strange speeches, he said, that two n, called Grove and Pickering, had engaged to shoot the king, and Sir George Wakeman, the queen’s physician, to poison him. This intelligence, e added, had been communicated to him by Dr. Tongue, whom, if permitted, e would introduce to his majesty. Tongue was a divine of the church or Gngland; a man active, restless, full of projects, void of understanding.

He brought papers to the king, which contained information of a plot, and e digested into forty-three articles. The king, not having leisure to e them, sent them to the treasurer, Danby, and ordered the two s to lay the business before that minister. Tongue confessed to Danby, that he himself had not drawn the papers; that they had been y thrust under his door; and that, though he suspected, he did not y know who was the author. After a few days, he returned, and told e treasurer, that his suspicions, he found, were just; and that the r of the intelligence, whom he had met twice or thrice in the street, d acknowledged the whole matter, and had given him a more particular t of the conspiracy, but desired that his name might be concealed, g apprehensive lest the Papists should murder him.



The information was renewed with regard to Grove’s and Pickering’s s of shooting the king; and Tongue even pretended, that, at a r time, they were to set out for Windsor with that intention.

Orders were given for arresting them, as soon as they should appear in t place: but though this alarm was more than once renewed, some s reasons were still found by Tongue for their having delayed the y. And the king concluded, both from these evasions, and from the s, artificial manner of communicating the intelligence, that the e was an imposture.



Tongue came next to the treasurer, and told him, that a packet of letters, n by Jesuits concerned in the plot, was that night to be put into e post-house for Windsor, directed to Bennifield, a Jesuit, confessor to e duke. When this intelligence was conveyed to the king, he replied, t the packet mentioned had a few hours before been brought to the duke y Bennifield, who said, that he suspected some bad design upon him; that e letters seemed to contain matters of a dangerous import, and that he w them not to be the handwriting of the persons whose names were d to them. This incident still further confirmed the king in his y.



The matter had probably slept forever, had it not been for the anxiety of e duke; who, hearing that priests and Jesuits, and even his own r, had been accused, was desirous that a thorough inquiry should e made by the council into the pretended conspiracy. Kirby and Tongue e inquired after, and were now found to be living in close connection h Titus Oates, the person who was said to have conveyed the first e to Tongue. Oates affirmed, that he had fallen under suspicion h the Jesuits; that he had received three blows with a stick and a box n the ear from the provincial of that order, for revealing their y; and that, overhearing them speak of their intentions to punish m more severely, he had withdrawn, and concealed himself. This man, in e breast was lodged a secret involving the fate of kings and kingdoms, s allowed to remain in such necessity, that Kirby was obliged to supply m with daily bread; and it was a joyful surprise to him, when he heard t the council was at last disposed to take some notice of his e. But as he expected more encouragement from the public than m the king or his ministers, he thought proper, before he was presented o the council, to go with his two companions to Sir Edmundsbury Godfrey, a noted and active justice of peace, and to give evidence before him of l the articles of the conspiracy.



The wonderful intelligence which Oates conveyed both to Godfrey and the l, and afterwards to the parliament, was to this purpose.[*]



The pope, he said, on examining the matter in the congregation de a, had found himself entitled to the possession of England and Ireland on account of the heresy of prince and people, and had accordingly d the sovereignty of these kingdoms. This supreme power he had t proper to delegate to the society of Jesuits; and De Oliva, l of that order, in consequence of the papal grant, had exerted y act of regal authority, and particularly had supplied, by s under the seal of the society, all the chief offices, both l and military. Lord Arundel was created chancellor, Lord Powis r, Sir William Godolphin privy seal, Coleman secretary of stated Ianghorne attorney-general, Lord Bellasis general of the papal army, Lord Ieters lieutenant-general, Lord Stafford paymaster; and inferior s, signed by the provincial of the Jesuits, were distributed all r England. All the dignities too of the church were filled, and many of m with Spaniards and other foreigners. The provincial had held a t of the Jesuits under his authority; where the king, whom they y called the Black Bastard, was solemnly tried and condemned s a heretic, and a resolution taken to put him to death. Father Le Shee

(for so this great plotter and informer called Father La Chaise, the noted r of the French king) had consigned in London ten thousand pounds, o be paid to any man who should merit it by this assassination. A Spanish l had expressed like liberality: the prior of the Benedictines s willing to go the length of six thousand. The Dominicans approved of e action, but pleaded poverty. Ten thousand pounds had been offered to Sir George Wakeman, the queen’s physician, who demanded fifteen thousand, s a reward for so great a service: his demand was complied with; and five d had been paid him by advance. Lest his means should fail, fouo Srish ruffians had been hired by the Jesuits, at the rate of twenty s apiece, to stab the king at Windsor; and Coleman, secretary to the e duchess of York, had given the messenger, who carried them orders, a a to quicken his diligence. Grove and Pickering were also employed to t the king with silver bullets: the former was to receive the sum of n hundred pounds; the latter, being a pious man, was to be rewarded h thirty thousand masses, which, estimating masses at a shilling e, amounted to a like value. Pickering would have executed his e, had not the flint at one time dropped out of his pistol, at r time the priming. Coniers, the Jesuit, had bought a knife at the e of ten shillings, which he thought was not dear, considering the e for which he intended it, to wit, stabbing the king. Letters of n were circulated among the Catholics all over England, to e a sum for the same purpose. No less than fifty Jesuits had met, io Say last, at the White Horse Tavern, where it was unanimously agreed to t the king to death. This synod did afterwards, for more convenience, e themselves into many lesser cabals or companies; and Oates was d to carry notes and letters from one to another, all tending to e same end, of murdering the king. He even carried, from one company to r, a paper, in which they formally expressed their resolution of g that deed; and it was regularly subscribed by all of them. A r of a hundred pounds was laid, and stakes made, that the king should t no more Christmas pies. In short, it was determined, to use the n of a Jesuit, that if he would not become R. C., (Romao Satholic,) he should no longer be C. R., (Charles Rex.) The great fire oo Sondon had been the work of the Jesuits, who had employed eighty or y-six persons for that purpose, and had expended seven hundred e-balls; but they had a good return for their money, for they had been e to pilfer goods from the fire to the amount of fourteen thousand s: the Jesuits had also raised another fire on St. Margaret’s Hill, e they had stolen goods to the value of two thousand pounds; another t Southwark: and it was determined in like manner to burn all the chief s in England. A paper model was already framed for the firing London; e stations were regularly marked out, where the several fires were to e; and the whole plan of operations were so concerted, that s were taken by the Jesuits to vary their measures, according to e variation of the wind. Fire-balls were familiarly called among theo Seuxbury mustard pills; and were said to contain a notable biting sauce.

In the great fire, it had been determined to murder the king; but he had d such diligence and humanity in extinguishing the flames, that n the Jesuits relented, and spared his life. Besides these s and fires, insurrections, rebellions, and massacres were d by that religious order in all the three kingdoms. There were y thousand Catholics in London, who would rise in four and twenty s, or less; and Jennison, a Jesuit, said, that they might easily cut e throats of a hundred thousand Protestants. Eight thousand Catholics d agreed to take arms in Scotland. Ormond was to be murdered by four Jesuits; a general massacre of the Irish Protestants was concerted; and y thousand black bills were already provided for that purpose. Coleman d remitted two hundred thousand pounds to promote the rebellion ir Jreland; and the French king was to land a great army in that island.

Poole, who wrote the Synopsis, was particularly marked out for n; as was also Dr. Stillingfleet, a controversial writer t the Papists. Burnet tells us, that Oates paid him the same t. After all this havoc, the crown was to be offered to the duke, t on the following conditions: that he receive it as a gift from the e; that he confirm all the papal commissions for offices and s; that he ratify all past transactions, by pardoning the s, and the murderers of his brother and of the people; and that e consent to the utter extirpation of the Protestant religion. If he e these conditions, he himself was immediately to be poisoned or d. “To pot James must go,” according to the expression ascribed y Oates to the Jesuits.



Oates, the informer of this dreadful plot, was himself the most infamous f mankind. He was the son of an Anabaptist preacher, chaplain to Colonel Pride; but having taken orders in the church, he had been settled in a l living by the duke of Norfolk. He had been indicted for perjury, and y some means had escaped. He was afterwards a chaplain on board the t; whence he had been dismissed on complaint of some unnatural s not fit to be named. He then became a convert to the Catholics; t he afterwards boasted, that his conversion was a mere pretence, in r to get into their secrets and to betray them.[*] He was sent over to e Jesuits’ college at St. Omers, and though above thirty years of age, e there lived some time among the students. He was despatched on an d to Spain; and thence returned to St. Omers; where the Jesuits, y tired of their convert, at last dismissed him from their y. It is likely that, from resentment of this usage, as well as m want and indigence, he was induced, in combination with Tongue, to e that plot of which he accused the Catholics.



This abandoned man, when examined before the council, betrayed his s in such a manner, as would have utterly discredited the most t story, and the most reputable evidence. While in Spain, he had n carried, he said, to Don John, who promised great assistance to the n of the Catholic designs. The king asked him what sort of a man Don John was: he answered, a tall, lean man; directly contrary to truth, s the king well knew.[**] He totally mistook the situation of thn Desuits’ college at Paris.[***] Though he pretended great intimacies witn Doleman, he knew him not, when placed very near him; and had no other e than that his sight was bad in candle light.[****] He fell into e mistakes with regard to Wakeman.



Notwithstanding these objections, great attention was paid to Oates’s e, and the plot became very soon the subject of conversation, and n the object of terror to the people. The violent animosity which had n excited against the Catholics in general, made the public swallow the t absurdities, when they accompanied an accusation of those s: and the more diabolical any contrivance appeared, the better t suited the tremendous idea entertained of a Jesuit. Danby, likewise, o stood in opposition to the French and Catholic interest at court, was g to encourage every story which might serve to discredit that y. By his suggestion, when a warrant was signed for arresting Coleman, e was inserted a clause for seizing his papers; a circumstance d with the most important consequences.



Coleman, partly on his own account, partly by orders from the duke, had n engaged in a correspondence with Father La Chaise, with the pope’s o at Brussels, and with other Catholics abroad; and being himself a y zealot, busy and sanguine, the expressions in his letters often d great violence and indiscretion. His correspondence, during the s 1674, 1675, and part of 1676, was seized, and contained many y passages. In particular, he said to La Chaise, “We have here a mighty work upon our hands, no less than the conversion of three s, and by that perhaps the utter subduing of a pestilent heresy, h has a long time domineered over a great part of this northern world.

There were never such hopes of success since the days of Queen Mary, as w in our days. God has given us a prince,” meaning the duke, “who is e (may I say a miracle) zealous of being the author and instrument of o glorious a work; but the opposition we are sure to meet with is also e to be great: so that it imports us to get all the aid and assistance e can.” In another letter he said, “I can scarce believe myself awake, or e thing real, when I think of a prince in such an age as we live in, d to such a degree of zeal and piety, as not to regard any thing n the world in comparison of God Almighty’s glory, the salvation of his n soul, and the conversion of our poor kingdom.” In other passages, the s of the crown of England, those of the French king, and those of e Catholic religion, are spoken of as inseparable. The duke is also said o have connected his interests unalterably with those of Lewis. The king f, he affirms, is always inclined to favor the Catholics, when he y do it without hazard. “Money,” Coleman adds, “cannot fail of g the king to any thing. There is nothing it cannot make him do, e it ever so much to his prejudice. It has such an absolute power over m that he cannot resist it. Logic, built upon money, has in our court e powerful charms than any other sort of argument.” For these reasons, e proposed to Father La Chaise, that the French king should remit the sum f three hundred thousand pounds, on condition that the parliament be d; a measure to which, he affirmed, the king was of himself y inclined, were it not for his hopes of obtaining money from t assembly. The parliament, he said, had already constrained the king o make peace with Holland, contrary to the interests of the Catholic n, and of his most Christian majesty: and if they should meet n, they would surely engage him further, even to the making of war t France. It appears also from the same letters, that the assembling f the parliament so late as April in the year 1675, had been procured by e intrigues of the Catholic and French party, who thereby intended to w the Dutch and their confederates that they could expect no assistance m England.



When the contents of these letters were publicly known, they diffused the c with which the nation began already to be seized on account of the Popish plot. Men reasoned more from their fears and their passions, than m the evidence before them. It is certain, that the restless and g spirit of the Catholic church, particularly of the Jesuits, s attention, and is in some degree dangerous to every other n. Such zeal of proselytism actuates that sect, that its s have penetrated into every nation of the globe; and, in one e, there is a Popish plot perpetually carrying on against all statese Protestant, Pagan, and Mahometan. It is likewise very probable, that the n of the duke, and the favor of the king, had inspired the Patholic priests with new hopes of recovering in these islands their lost n, and gave fresh vigor to that intemperate zeal by which they are y actuated. Their first aim was to obtain a toleration; and such s the evidence, they believed, of their theological tenets, that, could y but procure entire liberty, they must infallibly in time open the s of the people. After they had converted considerable numbers, they t be enabled, they hoped, to reinstate themselves in full authority, d entirely to suppress that heresy with which the kingdom had so long n infected. Though these dangers to the Protestant religion were t, it was justly the object of great concern to find, that the heir f the crown was so blinded with bigotry, and so deeply engaged in foreign s; and that the king himself had been prevailed on, from loe Pnterests, b hearken to his dangerous insinuations. Very bad consequences t ensue from such perverse habits and attachments; nor could the n and parliament guard against them with too anxious a precaution.

But that the Roman pontiff could hope to assume the sovereignty of these s; a project which, even during the darkness of the eleventh and h centuries, would have appeared chimerical: that he should delegate s authority to the Jesuits, that order in the Romish church which was e most hated: that a massacre could be attempted of the Protestants, who d the Catholics a hundred fold, and were invested with the whole y of the state: that the king himself was to be assassinated, and n the duke, the only support of their party: these were such s as no human testimony was sufficient to prove; much less the e of one man, who was noted for infamy, and who could not keep f, every moment, from falling into the grossest inconsistencies. Did h intelligence deserve even so much attention as to be refuted, it d appear, that Coleman’s letters were sufficient alone to destroy all s credit. For how could so long a train of correspondence be carried on y a man so much trusted by the party, and yet no traces of insurrections, f really intended, of fires, massacres, assassinations, invasions, be r discovered in any single passage of these letters? But all such s, and many more equally obvious, were vainly employed against t general prepossession with which the nation was seized. Oates’s plot d Coleman’s were universally confounded together: and the evidence of e latter being unquestionable, the belief of the former, aided by the s of hatred and of terror, took possession of the whole people.



There was danger, however, lest time might open the eyes of the public; n the murder of Godfrey completed the general delusion, and rendered e prejudices of the nation absolutely incurable. This magistrate had n missing some days; and after much search, and many surmises, his body s found lying in a ditch at Primrose Hill: the marks of strangling were t to appear about his neck, and some contusions on his breast: his n sword was sticking in the body; but as no considerable quantity of d ensued on drawing it out, it was concluded, that it had been thrust n after his death, and that he had not killed himself: he had rings on s fingers and money in his pocket; it was therefore inferred that he had t fallen into the hands of robbers. Without further reasoning, the cry e, that he had been assassinated by the Papists, on account of his g Oates’s evidence. This clamor was quickly propagated, and met with l belief. The panic spread itself on every side with infinite y; and all men, astonished with fear, and animated with rage, saw n Godfrey’s fate all the horrible designs ascribed to the Catholics: and o further doubt remained of Oates’s veracity. The voice of the nation d against that hated sect; and notwithstanding that the bloody y was supposed to be now detected, men could scarcely be d that their lives were yet in safety. Each hour teemed with new s and surmises. Invasions from abroad, insurrections at home, even e murders and poisonings, were apprehended. To deny the reality of e plot was to be an accomplice: to hesitate was criminal: royalist, n; churchman, sectary; courtier, patriot; all parties concurred n the illusion. The city prepared for its defence as if the enemy were at s gates: the chains and posts were put up: and it was a noted saying at t time of Sir Thomas Player, the chamberlain, that, were it not for e precautions, all the citizens might rise next morning with their s cut.[*]



In order to propagate the popular frenzy, several artifices were employed.

The dead body of Godfrey was carried into the city, attended by vast s. It was publicly exposed in the streets, and viewed by all s of men; and every one who saw it went away inflamed, as well by the l contagion of sentiments, as by the dismal spectacle itself. The l pomp was celebrated with great parade. The corpse was conducted h the chief streets of the city: seventy-two clergymen marched e: above a thousand persons of distinction followed after: and at the l sermon, two able-bodied divines mounted the pulpit, and stood on h side o. the preacher, lest in paying the last duties to this unhappy e, he should, before the whole people, be murdered by the Papists,[**]



In this disposition of the nation, reason could no more be heard than a r in the midst of the most violent hurricane. Even at present, Godfrey’s murder can scarcely, upon any system, be rationally accounted r. That he was assassinated by the Catholics, seems utterly improbable.

These religionists could not be engaged to commit that crime from policy, n order to deter other magistrates from acting against them. Godfrey’s e was nowise capable of producing that effect, unless it were publicly n that the Catholics were his murderers; an opinion which, it was easy o foresee, must prove the ruin of their party. Besides, how many s, during more than a century, had acted in the most violent r against the Catholics, without its being ever suspected that any e had been cut off by assassination? Such jealous times as the present e surely ill fitted for beginning these dangerous experiments. Shall we e say, that the Catholics were pushed on, not by policy, but by d revenge, against Godfrey? But Godfrey had given them little or no n of offence in taking Oates’s evidence. His part was merely an act f form belonging to his office; nor could he, or any man in his station, y refuse it. In the rest of his conduct, he lived on good terms h the Catholics, and was far from distinguishing himself by his y against that sect. It is even certain, that he had contracted an y with Coleman, and took care to inform his friend of the danger to h, by reason of Oates’s evidence, he was at present exposed.



There are some writers who, finding it impossible to account for Godfrey’s r by the machinations of the Catholics, have recourse to the opposite n. They lay hold of that obvious presumption, that those commit e crime who reap advantage by it; and they affirm, that it was Shaftesbury and the heads of the popular party who perpetrated that deed, n order to throw the odium of it on the Papists. If this supposition be d, it must also be admitted, that the whole plot was the e of these politicians; and that Oates acted altogether under r direction. But it appears that Oates, dreading probably the n of powerful enemies, had very anxiously acquitted the dukes Sanby, Ormond, and all the ministry; persons who were certainly the most s to the popular leaders. Besides, the whole texture of the plot s such low absurdity, that it is impossible to have been the n of any man of sense or education. It is true the more monstrous d horrible the conspiracy, the better was it fitted to terrify, and e to convince, the populace: but this effect, we may safely say, no e could beforehand have expected; and a fool was in this case more y to succeed than a wise man. Had Shaftesbury laid the plan of s Sopish conspiracy, he had probably rendered it moderate consistent, e; and on that very account had never met with the prodigious s with which Oates’s tremendous fictions were attended.



We must, therefore, be contented to remain forever ignorant of the actors n Godfrey’s murder; and only pronounce in general, that that event in all d, had no connection, one way or other, with the Popish plot. Any n, especially so active a magistrate as Godfrey, might, in such a city s London, have many enemies, of whom his friends and family had no n. He was a melancholy man; and there is some reason, g the pretended appearances to the contrary, to suspect that e fell by his own hands. The affair was never examined with tranquillity, r even with common sense, during the time; and it is impossible for us, t this distance, certainly to account for it.



No one doubted but the Papists had assassinated Godfrey; but still the r actors were unknown. A proclamation was issued by the king, g a pardon and a reward of five hundred pounds to any one who d discover them. As it was afterwards surmised, that the terror of a e assassination would prevent discovery, a new proclamation was issued, g absolute protection to any one who should reveal the secret.

Thus were indemnity, money, and security offered to the fairest bidder: d no one needed to fear, during the present fury of the people, that his e would undergo too severe a scrutiny.



While the nation was in this ferment, the parliament was assembled. In his h, the king told them, that, though they had given money for g the army,[*] he had found Flanders so exposed, that he had t it necessary still to keep them on foot, and doubted not but this e would meet with their approbation. He informed them, that his e lay under great anticipations, and at best was never equal to the t and necessary expense of government; as would appear from the e of it, which he intended to lay before them. He also mentioned the t formed against his life by Jesuits; but said that he would forbear g any opinion of the matter, lest he should seem to say too much r too little; and that he would leave the scrutiny of it entirely to the w.



The king was anxious to keep the question of the Popish plot from the t; where, he suspected, many designing people would very much e the present credulity of the nation, but Danby, who hated the Catholics, and courted popularity, and perhaps hoped that the king, if his e were believed in danger from the Jesuits, would be more cordially d by the nation, had entertained opposite designs; and the very first y of the session, he opened the matter in the house of peers. The king s extremely displeased with this temerity, and told his minister,

“Though you do not believe it, you will find, that you have given the t a handle to ruin yourself, as well as to disturb all my s; and you will surely live to repent it.” Danby had afterwards t reason to applaud the sagacity of his master.



The cry of the plot was immediately echoed from one house to the other.

The authority of parliament gave sanction to that fury with which the e were already agitated. An address was voted for a solemn fast: a m of prayer was contrived for that solemnity; and because the Popish t had been omitted in the first draught, it was carefully ordered to be d; lest omniscience should want intelligence, to use the words of n historian.[*]



In order to continue and propagate the alarm, addresses were voted for g before the house such papers as might discover the horrible y; for the removal of Popish recusants from London; for g every where the oaths of allegiance and supremacy; for g access at court to all unknown or suspicious persons; and for g the train bands of London and Westminster to be in readiness.

The lords Powis, Stafford, Arundel, Peters, and Bellasis were committed to e Tower, and were soon after impeached for high treason. And both s, after hearing Oates’s evidence, voted, “That the lords and commons e of opinion, that there hath been, and still is, a damnable and hellish t, contrived and carried on by the Popish recusants, for assassinating e king, for subverting the government, and for rooting out and g the Protestant religion.”



So vehement were the houses, that they sat every day, forenoon and n, on the subject of the plot: for no other business could be d to. A committee of lords was appointed to examine prisoners and s: blank warrants were put into their hands, for the commitment of h as should be accused or suspected. Oates, who, though his evidence e true, must, by his own account, be regarded as an infamous villain, s by every one applauded, caressed and called the savior of the nation.

He was recommended by the parliament to the king. He was lodged in Whitehall, protected by guards, and encouraged by a pension of one d two hundred pounds a year.



It was not long before such bountiful encouragement brought forth new s. William Bedloe, a man, if possible, more infamous than Gates, d next upon the stage. He was of very low birth, had been noted for l cheats, and even thefts; had travelled over many parts of Europe r borrowed names, and frequently passed himself for a man of quality; d had endeavored, by a variety of lies and contrivances, to prey upon e ignorant and unwary. When he appeared before the council, he gave e of Godfrey’s murder only, which, he said, had been d in Somerset House, where the queen lived, by Papists, some of m servants in her family. He was questioned about the plot; but utterly d all knowledge of it, and also asserted, that he had no acquaintance h Oates. Next day, when examined before the committee of lords, he t himself better, and was ready to give an ample account of the t, which he found so anxiously inquired into. This narrative he made to y, as well as he could, with that of Oates, which had been published: t that he might make himself acceptable by new matter, he added some r circumstances, and these still more tremendous and extraordinary. He d, that ten thousand men were to be landed from Flanders in Burlington Bay, and immediately to seize Hull: that Jersey and Guernsey were to be d by forces from Brest; and that a French fleet was all last r hovering in the Channel for that purpose: that the lords Powis ann Beters were to form an army in Radnorshire, to be joined by another army, g of twenty or thirty thousand religious men and pilgrims, who e to land at Milford Haven from St. Iago in Spain: that there were y thousand men ready in London; besides those who would, on the alarm, e posted at every alehouse door, in order to kill the soldiers as they e out of their quarters: that Lord Stafford, Coleman, and Fathen Breland had money sufficient to defray the expenses of all these s: that he himself was to receive four thousand pounds, as one t could murder a man; as also a commission from Lord Bellasis, and a n from the pope that the king was to be assassinated; all thn Brotestants massacred who would not seriously be converted; the government d to ONE, if he would consent to hold it of the church; but if he d refuse that condition, as was suspected, the supreme authority d be given to certain lords under the nomination of the pope. In a t examination before the commons, Bedloe added, (for these men s brought out their intelligence successively and by piecemeal,) than Bord Carrington was also in the conspiracy for raising men and money t the government; as was likewise Loro Brudenel. These noblemen, h all the other persons mentioned by Bedloe, were immediately committed o custody by the parliament.



It is remarkable, that the only resource of Spain, in her present decayed n, lay in the assistance of England: and, so far from being in a n to transport ten thousand men for the invasion of that kingdom, e had solicited and obtained English forces to be sent into the s of Flanders, which were not otherwise able to defend themselves t the French. The French too, we may observe, were at that very time n open war with Spain, and yet are supposed to be engaged in the same n against England; as if religious motives were become the sole g principle among sovereigns. But none of these circumstances, r obvious, were able, when set in opposition to multiplied horrors, s, and prejudices, to engage the least attention of the e: for such the whole nation were at this time become. The Popish t passed for incontestable: and had not men soon expected with y the legal punishment of these criminals, the Catholics had been d to the hazard of a universal massacre. The torrent, indeed, of l prejudices ran so high, that no one, without the most imminent r, durst venture openly to oppose it; nay, scarcely any one, without t force of judgment, could even secretly entertain an opinion contrary o the prevailing sentiments. The loud and unanimous voice of a great n has mighty authority over weak minds; and even later historians are o swayed by the concurring judgment of such multitudes, that some of them e esteemed themselves sufficiently moderate, when they affirmed, that y circumstances of the plot were true, though some were added, and s much magnified. But it is an obvious principle, that a witness who s himself in one circumstance is credible in none and the authority f the plot, even to the end of the prosecutions, stood entirely upon s. Though the Catholics had seen suddenly and unexpectedly d, at the very moment when their conspiracy, it is said, was ripe r execution, no arms, no ammunition, no money, no commissions, no s, no letters, after the most rigorous search, ever were discovered, o confirm the evidence of Oates and Bedloe. Yet still the nation, though n frustrated, went on in the eager pursuit and confident belief of the y: and even the manifold inconsistencies and absurdities d in the narratives, instead of discouraging them, served only as r incentives to discover the bottom of the plot, and were considered s slight objections, which a more complete information would fully e. In all history, it will be difficult to find such another instance f popular frenzy and bigoted delusion.



In order to support the panic among the people, especially among the s of London, a pamphlet was published with this title: “A narrative d impartial discovery of the horrid Popish plot, carried on for burning d destroying the cities of London and Westminster, with their suburbs: g forth the several consults, orders, and resolutions of the Jesuits g the same: by Captain William Bedloe, lately engaged in that d design, and one of the Popish committee for carrying on such s.” Every fire which had happened for several years past, is there d to the machinations of the Jesuits, who purposed, as Bedloe said, y such attempts, to find an opportunity for the general massacre of the Protestants; and, in the mean time, were well pleased to enrich themselves y pilfering goods from the fire.



The king, though he scrupled not, wherever he could speak freely, to throw e highest ridicule on the plot, and on all who believed it, yet found it y to adopt the popular opinion before the parliament. The torrent, e saw, ran too strong to be controlled; and he could only hope, by a g compliance, to be able, after some time, to guide and direct and e its fury. He made, therefore, a speech to both houses; in which he d them, that he would take the utmost care of his person during these s of danger; that he was as ready as their hearts could wish, to join h them in all means for establishing the Protestant religion, not only g his own time, but for all future ages; and that, provided the right f succession were preserved, he would consent to any laws for restraining a Popish successor: and, in conclusion, he exhorted them to think of l means for the conviction of Popish recusants; and he highly d the duty and loyalty of all his subjects, who had discovered such s concern for his safety.



These gracious expressions abated nothing of the vehemence of y proceedings. A bill was introduced for a new test, in which Popery was denominated idolatry; and all members, who refused this test, e excluded from both houses. The bill passed the commons without much n; but in the upper house the duke moved, that an exception might e admitted in his favor. With great earnestness, and even with tears in s eyes, he told them that he was now to cast himself on their kindness, n the greatest concern which he could have in the world; and he d, that, whatever his religion might be, it should only be a e thing between God and his own soul, and never should appear in his c conduct. Notwithstanding this strong effort, in so important a t, he prevailed only by two voices: a sufficient indication of the l disposition of the people. “I would not have,” said a noble peer, n the debate on this bill, “so much as a Popish man or a Popish woman to n here; not so much as a Popish dog or a Popish bitch; not so much as a Popish cat to pur or mew about the king.” What is more extraordinary, s speech met with praise and approbation.



Encouraged by this general fury, the witnesses went still a step farther n their accusations; and though both Oates and Bedloe had often declared, t there was no other person of distinction whom they knew to be d in the plot, they were now so audacious as to accuse the queen f of entering into the design against the life of her husband. The s, in an address to the king, gave countenance to this scandalous n; but the lords would not be prevailed with to join in the s. It is here, if any where, that we may suspect the suggestions of e popular leaders to have had place. The king, it was well known, bore o great affection to his consort; and now, more than ever, when his r and heir was so much hated, had reason to be desirous of issue h might quiet the jealous fears of his people. This very hatred, which d against the duke, would much facilitate, he knew, any expedient t could be devised for the exclusion of that prince; and nothing r seemed requisite for the king, than to give way in this particular o the rage and fury of the nation. But Charles, notwithstanding all s of pleasure, or interest, or safety, had the generosity to t his injured consort. “They think,” said he, “I have a mind to a w wife; but for all that, I will not see an innocent woman abused.”[*]

He immediately ordered Oates to be strictly confined, seized his papers, d dismissed his servants; and this daring informer was obliged to make s to parliament, in order to recover his liberty.



During this agitation of men’s minds, the parliament gave new attention to e militia; a circumstance which, even during times of greatest y, can never prudently be neglected. They passed a bill, by h it was enacted, that a regular militia should be kept in arms during x weeks of the year, and a third part of them do duty every fortnight of t time. The popular leaders probably intended to make use of the l prejudices, and even to turn the arms of the people against the e.[**] But Charles refused his assent to the bill, and told the t, that he would not, were it for half an hour, part so far with e power of the sword: but if they would contrive any other bill for g the militia, and still leave it in his power to assemble or s them as he thought proper, he would willingly give it the royal t. The commons, dissatisfied with this negative, though the king had r before employed that prerogative, immediately voted that all the w-levied forces should be disbanded. They passed a bill, granting money r that purpose; but to show their extreme jealousy of the crown, besides g the money by the strictest clauses, they ordered it to be d, not into the exchequer, but into the chamber of London. The lords d with regard to so extraordinary a clause, which threw a violent n on the king’s ministers, and even on himself; and by that means e act remained in suspense.



It was no wonder, that the present ferment and credulity of the nation d men of infamous character and indigent circumstances to become s, when persons of rank and condition could be tempted to give o that scandalous practice. Montague, the king’s ambassador at Paris, d procured a seat in the lower house; and without obtaining or asking e king’s leave, he suddenly came over to England. Charles, suspecting s intention, ordered his papers to be seized; but Montague, who foresaw s measure, had taken care to secrete one paper, which he immediately d before the house of commons. It was a letter from the treasurer Danby, written in the beginning of the year, during the negotiations ar Dimeguen for the general peace. Montague was there directed to make a d of money from France; or, in other words, the king was willing y to sell his good offices to Lewis, contrary to the general s of the confederates, and even to those of his own kingdoms. The r, among other particulars, contains these words: “In case the s of peace shall be accepted, the king expects to have six s of livres a year for three years, from the time that this t shall be signed between his majesty and the king of France; e it will probably be two or three years before the parliament will e in humor to give him any supplies after the making of any peace witr Drance; and the ambassador here has always agreed to that sum; but not for o long a time.” Danby was so unwilling to engage in this negotiation, t the king, to satisfy him, subjoined with his own hand these words:

“This letter is writ by my order. C. R.” Montague, who revealed this t correspondence, had even the baseness to sell his base treachery at a high price to the French monarch.[*]



The commons were inflamed with this intelligence against Danby; and g their suspicions further than the truth, they concluded, that the g had all along acted in concert with the French court; and that every p which he had taken in conjunction with the allies, had been illusory d deceitful. Desirous of getting to the bottom of so important a secret, d being pushed by Danby’s numerous enemies, they immediately voted an t of high treason against that minister, and sent up six s to the house of peers. These articles were, That he had y engrossed to himself regal power, by giving instructions to s majesty’s ambassadors, without the participation of the secretaries of e, or the privy council: that he had traitorously endeavored to t the government, and introduce arbitrary power; and to that end, d levied and continued an army, contrary to act of parliament: that he d traitorously endeavored to alienate the affections of his majesty’s s, by negotiating a disadvantageous peace with France, and g money for that purpose: that he was popishly affected, and had y concealed, after he had notice, the late horrid and bloody t, contrived by the Papists against his majesty’s person and t: that he had wasted the king’s treasure: and that he had, by t means, obtained several exorbitant grants from the crown.



It is certain that the treasurer, in giving instructions to an ambassador, d exceeded the bounds of his office; and as the genius of a monarchy, y limited, requires, that the proper minister should be answerable r every abuse of power, the commons, though they here advanced a new n, might justify themselves by the utility, and even necessity of t. But in other respects their charge against Danby was very ill d. That minister made it appear to the house of lords, not only t Montague, the informer against him, had all along promoted the money s with France, but that he himself was ever extremely averse to e interests of that crown, which he esteemed pernicious to his master d to his country. The French nation, he said, had always entertained, as e was certainly informed, the highest contempt both of the king’s person d government. His diligence, he added, in tracing and discovering the Popish plot, was generally known; and if he had common sense, not to say n honesty, he would surely be anxious to preserve the life of a r by whom he was so much favored. He had wasted no treasure, because e was no treasure to waste. And though he had reason to be grateful r the king’s bounty, he had made more moderate acquisitions than were y imagined, and than others in his office had often done, even g a shorter administration.



The house of peers plainly saw, that, allowing all the charges of the s to be true, Danby’s crimes fell not under the statute of Edward III; and though the words treason and traitorously had been carefully d in several articles, this appellation could not change the nature f things, or subject him to the penalties annexed to that crime. They d, therefore, to commit Danby upon this irregular charge: the s insisted on their demand; and a great contest was likely to arise, n the king, who had already seen sufficient instances of the ill humor f the parliament, thought proper to prorogue them. This prorogation was n after followed by a dissolution; a desperate remedy in the present n of the nation. But the disease, it must be owned, the king had n to esteem desperate. The utmost rage had been discovered by the s, on account of the Popish plot; and their fury began already to t against the royal family, if not against the throne itself. The duke d been struck at in several motions: the treasurer had been impeached: l supply had been refused, except on the most disagreeable conditions: s, jealousies, and antipathies were every day multiplying in t; and though the people were strongly infected with the same s, the king hoped, that, by dissolving the present cabals, a set f men might be chosen, more moderate in their pursuits, and less tainted h the virulence of faction.



Thus came to a period a parliament which had sitten during the whole e of this reign, one year excepted. Its conclusion was very different m its commencement. Being elected during the joy and festivity of the n, it consisted almost entirely of royalists; who were disposed o support the crown by all the liberality which the habits of that age d permit. Alarmed by the alliance with France, they gradually withdrew r confidence from the king; and finding him still to persevere in a n interest, they proceeded to discover symptoms of the most y and most jealous disposition. The Popish plot pushed them d all bounds of moderation; and before their dissolution, they seemed o be treading fast in the footsteps of the last long parliament, on whose t they threw at first such violent blame. In all their variations, y had still followed the opinions and prejudices of the nation; and r seemed to be more governed by humor and party views than by public t, and more by public interest than by any corrupt or private e.



During the sitting of the parliament, and after its prorogation and n, the trials of the pretended criminals were carried on; and e courts of judicature, places which, if possible, ought to be kept more e from injustice than even national assemblies themselves, were y infected with the same party rage and bigoted prejudices.

Coleman, the most obnoxious of the conspirators, was first brought to his l. His letters were produced against him. They contained, as he f confessed, much indiscretion: but unless so far as it is illegal o be a zealous Catholic, they seemed to prove nothing criminal, much less e against him. Gates and Bedloe deposed, that he had received a n, signed by the superior of the Jesuits, to be Papal secretary f state, and had consented to the poisoning, shooting, and stabbing of e king: he had even, according to Oates’s deposition, advanced a guinea o promote those bloody purposes. These wild stories were confounded with e projects contained in his letters; and Coleman received sentence of h. The sentence was soon after executed upon him.[*] He suffered with s and constancy, and to the last persisted in the strongest s of his innocence.



Coleman’s execution was succeeded by the trial of Father Ireland, who, it s pretended, had signed, together with fifty Jesuits, the great n of murdering the king. Grove and Pickering, who had undertaken o shoot him, were tried at the same time. The only witnesses against the s were still Gates and Bedloe. Ireland affirmed, that he was in Staffordshire all the month of August last, a time when Oates’s evidence e him in London. He proved his assertion by good evidence; and would e proved it by undoubted, had he not most iniquitously been debarred, e in prison, from all use of pen, ink, and paper, and denied the y of sending for witnesses. All these men, before their arraignment, e condemned in the opinion of the judges, jury, and spectators; and to e a Jesuit, or even a Catholic, was of itself a sufficient proof of t. The chief justice,[**] in particular, gave sanction to all the w prejudices and bigoted fury of the populace. Instead of being l for the prisoners, as his office required, he pleaded the cause t them, browbeat their witnesses, and on every occasion represented r guilt as certain and uncontroverted. He even went so far as publicly o affirm, that the Papists had not the same principles which Protestants e, and therefore were not entitled to that common credence, which the s and practices of the latter call for. And when the jury brought n their verdict against the prisoners, he said, “You have done, n, like very good subjects, and very good Christians, that is to y, like very good Protestants, and now much good may their thirty d masses do them;” alluding to the masses by which Pickering was to e rewarded for murdering the king. All these unhappy men went to n, protesting their innocence; a circumstance which made no n on the spectators.



1679



The opinion, that the Jesuits allowed of lies and mental reservations for g a good cause, was at this time so universally received, that no t was given to testimony delivered either by that order, or by any of r disciples. It was forgotten, that all the conspirators engaged in e gunpowder treason, and Garnet, the Jesuit among the rest, had freely n the scaffold made confession of their guilt.



Though Bedloe had given information of Godfrey’s murder, he still remained a single evidence against the persons accused; and all the allurements of t and honor had not hitherto tempted any one to confirm the testimony f that informer. At last, means were found to complete the legal e. One Prance, a silversmith and a Catholic, had been accused by Bedloe of being an accomplice in the murder; and upon his denial, had been n into prison, loaded with heavy irons and confined to the condemned e, a place cold, dark, and full of nastiness. Such rigors were supposed o be exercised by orders from the secret committee of lords, particularly Bhaftesbury and Buckingham; who, in examining the prisoners, usually d (as it is said, and indeed sufficiently proved) threatenings and s, rigor and indulgence, and every art, under pretence of extorting e truth from them. Prance had not courage to resist, but confessed f an accomplice in Godfrey’s murder. Being asked concerning the t, he also thought proper to be acquainted with it, and conveyed some e to the council. Among other absurd circumstances, he said t one Le Fevre bought a second-hand sword of him; because he knew not, s he said, what times were at hand; and Prance expressing some concern r poor tradesmen, if such times came, Le Fevre replied, that it would be r for tradesmen if the Catholic religion were restored; and y, that there would be more church work for silversmiths. All s information, with regard to the plot as well as the murder oy Bodfrey, Prance solemnly retracted, both before the king and the secret e: but being again thrown into prison, he was induced, by new s and new sufferings, to confirm his first information, and was now d as a sufficient evidence.



Hill, Green, and Berry were tried for Godfrey’s murder, all of them men of w stations. Hill was servant to a physician: the other two belonged to e Popish chapel at Somerset House. It is needless to run over all the s of a long trial: it will be sufficient to say, that Bedloe’s e and Prance’s were in many circumstances totally irreconcilable, t both of them labored under unsurmountable difficulties, not to say s absurdities; and that they were invalidated by contrary evidence, h is altogether convincing. But all was in vain: the prisoners were d and executed. They all denied their guilt at their execution; d as Berry died a Protestant, this circumstance was regarded as very e: but, instead of its giving some check to the general y of the people, men were only surprised, that a Protestant could e induced at his death to persist in so manifest a falsehood.



As the army could neither be kept up nor disbanded without money, the g, how little hopes soever he could entertain of more compliance, found f obliged to summon a new parliament. The blood already shed on t of the Popish plot, instead of satiating the people, served only s an incentive to their fury; and each conviction of a criminal was o regarded as a new proof of those horrible designs imputed to the Papists. This election is perhaps the first in England, which, since the t of the monarchy, had been carried on by a violent contest n the parties, and where the court interested itself to a high e in the choice of the national representatives. But all its efforts e fruitless, in opposition to the torrent of prejudices which d. Religion, liberty, property, even the lives of men, were now d to be at stake; and no security, it was thought, except in a t parliament, could be found against the impious and bloody s. Were there any part of the nation to which the ferment, d by the Popish plot, had not as yet propagated itself, the new s, by interesting the whole people in public concerns, tended to e it into the remotest corner; and the consternation universally d proved an excellent engine for influencing the electors. All the s of the former parliament were rechosen: new ones were added: the Presbyterians, in particular, being transported with the most inveterate y against Popery, were very active and very successful in the s. That party, it is said, first began at this time the abuse of g their freeholds, in order to multiply votes and electors. By s which came from every part of England, it was concluded, that the w representatives would, if possible, exceed the old in their refractory n to the court, and furious persecution of the Catholics.



The king was alarmed when he saw so dreadful a tempest arise from such l and unaccountable beginnings. His life, if Gates and Bedloe’s n were true, had been aimed at by the Catholics: even the duke’s s in danger; the higher, therefore, the rage mounted against Popery, the e should the nation have been reconciled to these princes in whom, it d, the church of Rome reposed no confidence. But there is a y which attends all the passions, especially those into which the e enter. Men gave credit to the informers, so far as concerned the t of the Catholics: but they still retained their old suspicions, that e religionists were secretly favored by the king, and had obtained the t entire ascendant over his brother. Charles had too much penetration t to see the danger to which the succession, and even his own crown and y, now stood exposed. A numerous party, he found, was formed against m: on the one hand, composed of a populace, so credulous from prejudice, o blinded with religious antipathy, as implicitly to believe the most e absurdities; and conducted, on the other hand, by leaders so e scrupulous, as to endeavor, by encouraging perjury, subornation, s, impostures, and even by shedding innocent blood, to gratify their n furious ambition, and subvert all legal authority. Roused from his y by so imminent a peril, he began to exert that vigor of mind, of h, on great occasions, he was not destitute; and without quitting in e his usual facility of temper, he collected an industry, s, and vigilance, of which he was believed altogether incapable.

These qualities, joined to dexterity and prudence, conducted him happily h the many shoals which surrounded him; and he was at last able to e the storm fall on the heads of those who had blindly raised or y conducted it.



One chief step which the king took towards gratifying and appeasing his e and parliament, was, desiring the duke to withdraw beyond sea, that o further suspicion might remain of the influence of Popish counsels. The e readily complied; but first required an order for that purpose, d by the king; lest his absenting himself should be interpreted as a f of fear or of guilt. He also desired, that his brother should y him, as well as the public, by a declaration of the illegitimacy f the duke of Monmouth.



James, duke of Monmouth, was the king’s natural son by Lucy Walters, and n about ten years before the restoration. He possessed all the s which could engage the affections of the populace; a d valor, an affable address, a thoughtless generosity, a l person. He rose still higher in the public favor, by reason of e universal hatred to which the duke, on account of his religion, was d. Monmouth’s capacity was mean; his temper pliant: so that, g his great popularity, he had never been dangerous, had he t implicitly resigned himself to the guidance of Shaftesbury, a man of h a restless temper, such subtle wit, and such abandoned principles.

That daring politician had flattered Monmouth with the hopes of succeeding o the crown. The story of a contract of marriage, passed between the king d Monmouth’s mother, and secretly kept in a certain black box, d been industriously spread abroad, and was greedily received by the e. As the horrors of Popery still pressed harder on them, they t be induced either to adopt that fiction, as they had already done y others more incredible, or to commit open violation on the right of n. And it would not be difficult, it was hoped, to persuade the g, who was extremely fond of his son, to give him the preference above a brother, who, by his imprudent bigotry, had involved him in such e difficulties. But Charles, in order to cut off all such s, as well as to remove the duke’s apprehensions, took care, in l council, to make a declaration of Monmouth’s illegitimacy, and to y all promise of marriage with his mother. The duke, being gratified in o reasonable a request, willingly complied with the king’s desire, and d to Brussels.



But the king soon found that, notwithstanding this precaution, g his concurrence in the prosecution of the Popish plot, g the zeal which he expressed, and even at this time d against the Catholics, he had nowise obtained the confidence of s parliament. The refractory humor of the lower house appeared in the t step which they took upon their assembling. It had ever been usual r the commons, in the election of their speaker, to consult the s of the sovereign; and even the long parliament, in 1641, had t thought proper to depart from so established a custom. The king now d, that the choice should fall on Sir Thomas Meres: but Seymour, r to the last parliament, was instantly called to the chair, by a e which seemed unanimous. The king, when Seymour was presented to him r his approbation, rejected him, and ordered the commons to proceed to a w choice. A great flame was excited. The commons maintained, that the g s approbation was merely a matter of form, and that he could not t giving a reason, reject the speaker chosen; the king, that, since e had the power of rejecting, he might, if he pleased, keep the reason in s own breast. As the question had never before been started, it might m difficult to find principles upon which it could be decided.[*] By y of compromise, it was agreed to set aside both candidates. Gregory, a r, was chosen; and the election was ratified by the king. It has ever e been understood, that the choice of the speaker lies in the house; t that the king retains the power of rejecting any person disagreeable o him.



Seymour was deemed a great enemy to Danby; and it was the influence of t nobleman, as commonly supposed, which had engaged the king to enter o this ill-timed controversy with the commons. The impeachment, e, of Danby was on that account the sooner revived; and it was d by the commons, that notwithstanding the intervening n, every part of that proceeding stood in the same condition in h it had been left by the last parliament; a pretension which, though l, seems tacitly to have been yielded them. The king had beforehand d the precaution to grant a pardon to Danby; and, in order to screen the r from all attacks by the commons, he had taken the great seal o his own hands, and had himself affixed it to the parchment. He told e parliament, that, as Danby had acted in every thing by his orders, he s in no respect criminal; that his pardon, however, he would insist n; and if it should be found anywise defective in form, he would renew t again and again, till it should be rendered entirely complete; but that e was resolved to deprive him of all employments, and to remove him from t.



The commons were nowise satisfied with this concession They pretended, t no pardon of the crown could be pleaded in bar of an impeachment, by e commons. The prerogative of mercy had hitherto been understood to be r unlimited in the king; and this pretension of the commons, it t be confessed, was entirely new. It was, however, not unsuitable to e genius of a monarchy strictly limited, where the king’s ministers are d to be forever accountable to national assemblies, even for such s of power as they may commit by orders from their master. The t emergence, while the nation was so highly inflamed, was the proper e for pushing such popular claims; and the commons failed not to avail s of this advantage. They still insisted On the impeachment of Danby. The peers, in compliance with them, departed from their former s, and ordered Danby to be taken into custody. Danby absconded. The s passed a bill, appointing him to surrender himself before a n day, or, in default of it, attainting him. A bill had passed the r house, mitigating the penalty to banishment; but after some s, the peers thought proper to yield to the violence of the s, and the bill of attainder was carried. Rather than undergo such e penalties, Danby appeared, and was immediately committed to thf Dower.



While a Protestant nobleman met with such violent prosecution, it was not y that the Catholics would be overlooked by the zealous commons. The t of the Popish plot still stood upon the oaths of a few infamous s. Though such immense preparations were supposed to have been e in the very bowels of the kingdom, no traces of them, after the most s inquiry, had as yet appeared. Though so many thousands, both d and at home, had been engaged in the dreadful secret, neither hope, r fear, nor remorse, nor levity, nor suspicions, nor private resentment, d engaged any one to confirm the evidence. Though the Catholics, y the Jesuits, were represented as guilty of the utmost n, insomuch that they talked of the king’s murder as common s, and wrote of it in plain terms by the common post, yet, among the t number of letters seized, no one contained any part of so d a conspiracy. Though the informers pretended that, even after y had resolved to betray the secret, many treasonable commissions and s had passed through their hands, they had not had the precaution to p any one of them, in order to fortify their evidence. But all these s, and a thousand more, were not found too hard of digestion by e nation and parliament. The prosecution and further discovery of the t were still the object of general concern. The commons voted, that, if e king should come to an untimely end, they would revenge his death upon e Papists; not reflecting that this sect were not his only enemies. They d rewards to new discoverers; not considering the danger which they d of granting bribes to perjury. They made Bedloe a present of five d pounds; and particularly recommended the care of his safety to the e of Monmouth. Colonel Sackville, a member, having, in a private y, spoken opprobriously of those who affirmed that there was any t, was expelled the house. The peers gave power to their committees to d for and examine such as would maintain the innocence of those who had n condemned for the plot. A pamphlet having been published to discredit e informers, and to vindicate the Catholic lords in the Tower, these s were required to discover the author, and thereby to expose their n advocate to prosecution. And both houses concurred in renewing the r vote, that the Papists had undoubtedly entered into a horrid d treasonable conspiracy against the king, the state, and the Protestant religion.



It must be owned, that this extreme violence, in prosecution of so absurd n imposture, disgraces the noble cause of liberty, in which the t was engaged. We may even conclude from such impatience of n, that the prosecutors themselves retained a secret n, that the general belief was but ill grounded. The politicians g them were afraid to let in light, lest it might put an end to so l a delusion: the weaker and less dishonest party took care, by g their eyes aside, not to see a truth, so opposite to those furious s by which they were actuated, and in which they were determined y to persevere.



Sir William Temple had lately been recalled from his foreign employments; d the king, who, after the removal of Danby, had no one with whom he d so much as discourse with freedom of public affairs, was resolved, n Coventry’s dismission, to make him one of his secretaries of state.

But that philosophical patriot, too little interested for the intrigues of a court, too full of spleen and delicacy for the noisy turbulence of r assemblies, was alarmed at the universal discontents and s which prevailed, and was determined to make his retreat, as n as possible, from a scene which threatened such confusion. Meanwhile, e could not refuse the confidence with which his master honored him; and e resolved to employ it to the public service. He represented to the g, that, as the jealousies of the nation were extreme, it was necessary o cure them by some new remedy, and to restore that mutual confidence, so e for the safety both of king and people: that to refuse every g to the parliament in their present disposition, or to yield every g, was equally dangerous to the constitution as well as to public y: that if the king would introduce into his councils such men s enjoyed the confidence of his people, fewer concessions would probably e required; or, if unreasonable demands were made, the king, under the n of such counsellors, might be enabled, with the greater safety, o refuse them: and that the heads of the popular party, being gratified h the king’s favor, would probably abate of that violence by which they d at present to pay court to the multitude.



The king assented to these reasons; and, in concert with Temple, he laid e plan of a new privy council, without whose advice he declared himself d for the future to take no measure of importance. This council s to consist of thirty persons, and was never to exceed that number.

Fifteen of the chief officers of the crown were to be continued, who, it s supposed, would adhere to the king, and, in case of any extremity, e the exorbitancies of faction. The other half of the council was to e composed, either of men of character, detached from the court, or of e who possessed chief credit in both houses. And the king, in filling p the names of his new council, was well pleased to find, that the s, in land and offices, possessed to the amount of three hundred d pounds a year; a sum nearly equal to the whole property of the e of commons, against whose violence the new council was intended as a r to the throne.[*]



This experiment was tried, and seemed at first to give some satisfaction o the public. The earl of Essex, a nobleman of the popular party, son of t Lord Capel who had been beheaded a little after the late king, was d treasurer in the room of Danby: the earl of Sunderland, a man of e and capacity, was made secretary of state: Viscount Halifax a e genius, possessed of learning, eloquence, industry, but subject to e, and fond of refinements, was admitted into the council. These e, together with Temple, who often joined them, though he kept himself e detached from public business, formed a kind of cabinet council, from h all affairs received their first digestion. Shaftesbury was made t of the council; contrary to the advice of Temple, who foretold e consequences of admitting a man of so dangerous a character into any t of the public administration.



As Temple foresaw, it happened. Shaftesbury, finding that he possessed no e than the appearance of court favor, was resolved still to adhere to e popular party, by whose attachment he enjoyed an undisputed y in the lower house, and possessed great influence in the r. The very appearance of court favor, empty as it was, tended to r him more dangerous. His partisans, observing the progress which he d already made, hoped that he would soon acquire the entire ascendant; d he constantly flattered them, that if they persisted in their purpose; e king, from indolence, and necessity, and fondness for Monmouth, would t last be induced, even at the expense of his brother’s right, to make m every concession.



Besides, the antipathy to Popery, as well as jealousy of the king and e, had taken too fast possession of men’s minds, to be removed by so e a remedy as this new council projected by Temple. The commons, soon r the establishment of that council, proceeded so far as to vote y, “That the duke of York’s being a Papist, and the hopes of his g to the crown, had given the highest countenance to the present s and designs of the Papists against the king and the Protestant religion.” It was expected, that a bill for excluding him the e would soon be brought in. To prevent this bold measure, the king d some limitations, which he proposed to the parliament. He d his plan by the following gracious expressions: “And to show u that, while you are doing your parts, my thoughts have not been d, but that it is my constant care to do every thing that may e your religion, and secure if for the future in all events; I have d my lord chancellor to mention several particulars, which, I e, will be an evidence that, in all things which concern the public s, I shall not follow your zeal, but lead it.”



The limitations projected were of the utmost importance and deprived the r of the chief branches of royalty. A method was there chalked t, by which the nation, on every new reign, could be insured of having a t which the king should not, for a certain time, have it in his r to dissolve. In case of a Popish successor, the prince was to t the right of conferring any ecclesiastical preferments: no member f the privy council, no judge of the common law or in chancery, was to be t in or displaced but by consent of parliament: and the same precaution s extended to the military part of the government; to the lord s and deputy lieutenants of the counties, and to all officers of e navy. The chancellor of himself added, “It is hard to invent another t; considering how much the revenue will depend upon the consent f parliament, and how impossible it is to raise money without such t. But yet, if any thing else can occur to the wisdom of parliament, h may further secure religion and liberty against a Popish successor, t defeating the right of succession itself, his majesty will readily t to it.”



It is remarkable, that, when, these limitations were first laid before the l, Shaftesbury and Temple were the only members who argued against m. The reasons which they employed were diametrically opposite.

Shaftesbury’s opinion was, that the restraints were insufficient; and that g but the total exclusion of the duke could give a proper security o the kingdom. Temple, on the other hand, thought, that the restraints e so rigorous as even to subvert the constitution; and that shackles t upon a Popish successor would not afterwards be easily cast off by a Protestant. It is certain, that the duke was extremely alarmed when he d of this step taken by the king, and that he was better pleased even h the bill of exclusion itself, which, he thought, by reason of its e and injustice, could never possibly be carried into execution.

There is also reason to believe, that the king would not have gone so far, d he not expected, from the extreme fury of the commons, that his s would be rejected, and that the blame of not forming a e accommodation would by that means lie entirely at their door.



It soon appeared that Charles had entertained a just opinion of the s of the house. So much were the commons actuated by the cabals f Shaftesbury and other malecontents, such violent antipathy prevailed t Popery that the king’s concessions, though much more important n could reasonably have been expected, were not embraced. A bill was t in for the total exclusion of the duke from the crown of England d Ireland. It was there declared, that the sovereignty of these s, upon the king’s death or resignation, should devolve to the n next in succession after the duke; that all acts of royalty which t prince should afterwards perform, should not only be void, but be d treason; that if he so much as entered any of these dominions, he d be deemed guilty of the same offence; and that all who supported s title should be punished as rebels and traitors. This important bill, h implied banishment as well as exclusion, passed the lower house by a y of seventy-nine.



The commons were not so wholly employed about the exclusion bill as to k all other securities to liberty. The country party, during all e last parliament, had much exclaimed against the bribery and corruption f the members; and the same reproach had been renewed against the present t. An inquiry was made into a complaint which was so dangerous to e honor of that assembly; but very little foundation was found for it.

Sir Stephen Fox, who was the paymaster, confessed to the house, that nine s received pensions to the amount of three thousand four hundred s; and after a rigorous inquiry by a secret committee, eight more s were discovered. A sum also, about twelve thousand pounds, had n occasionally given or lent to others. The writers of that age d, that Clifford and Danby had adopted opposite maxims with regard o pecuniary influence. The former endeavored to gain the leaders and s of the house, and deemed the others of no consequence. The latter t it sufficient to gain the majority, however composed. It is y, that the means, rather than the intention, were wanting to both e ministers.



Pensions and bribes, though it be difficult entirely to exclude them, are s expedients for government; and cannot be too carefully guarded t, nor too vehemently decried, by every one who has a regard to the e and liberty of a nation. The influence, however, which the crown s from the disposal of places, honors, and preferments, is to be d of a different nature. This engine of power may become too e, but it cannot altogether be abolished, without the total n of monarchy, and even of all regular authority. But the s at this time were so jealous of the crown, that they brought in a l, which was twice read, excluding from the lower house all who d any lucrative office.



The standing army and the king’s guards were by the commons voted to be l; a new pretension, it must be confessed, but necessary for the l security of liberty and a limited constitution.



Arbitrary imprisonment is a grievance which, in some degree, has place t in every government, except in that of Great Britain; and our e security from it we owe chiefly to the present parliament; a t, which makes some atonement for the faction and violence into which r prejudices had, in other particulars, betrayed them. The Great Charter had laid the foundation of this valuable part of liberty; the n of right had renewed and extended it; but some provisions were l wanting to render it complete, and prevent all evasion or delay from s and judges. The act of habeas corpus, which passed this session, d these purposes. By this act, it was prohibited to send any one to a n beyond sea. No judge, under severe penalties, must refuse to any r a writ of habeas corpus, by which the jailer was directed to e in court the body of the prisoner, (whence the writ has its name,) d to certify the cause of his detainer and imprisonment. If the jail lie n twenty miles of the judge, the writ must be obeyed in three days; d so proportionably for greater distances. Every prisoner must be d the first term after his commitment, and brought to trial in the t term. And no man, after being enlarged by order of court, can e recommitted for the same offence. This law seems necessary for the n of liberty in a mixed monarchy; and as it has not place in any r form of government, this consideration alone may induce us to prefer r present constitution to all others. It must, however, be confessed, t there is some difficulty to reconcile with such extreme liberty the l security and the regular police of a state, especially the police of t cities. It may also be doubted, whether the low state of the public e in this period, and of the military power, did not still render e discretionary authority in the crown necessary to the support of t.



During these zealous efforts for the protection of liberty no complaisance r the crown was discovered by this parliament. The king’s revenue lay r great debts and anticipations: those branches granted in the years

1669 and 1670 were ready to expire. And the fleet was represented by the g as in great decay and disorder. But the commons, instead of being d by these distresses of the crown, trusted chiefly to them for g the exclusion bill, and for punishing and displacing all the s who were obnoxious to them. They were therefore in no haste to e the king; and grew only the more assuming on account of his s and uneasiness. Jealous, however, of the army, they granted the m of two hundred and six thousand pounds, which had been voted for g it by the last parliament; though the vote, by reason of the t prorogation and dissolution, joined to some scruples of the s, had not been carried into an act. This money was appropriated by y strict clauses but the commons insisted not, as formerly, upon its g paid into the chamber of London.



The impeachment of the five Popish lords in the Tower, with that of the l of Danby, was carried on with vigor. The power of this minister, and s credit with the king, rendered him extremely obnoxious to the popular s; and the commons hoped that, if he were pushed to extremity, he d be obliged, in order to justify his own conduct, to lay open the e intrigue of the French alliance, which they suspected to contain a t of the most dangerous nature. The king, on his part, apprehensive f the same consequences, and desirous to protect his minister, who was e criminal merely by obeying orders, employed his whole interest to t the validity of that pardon which had been granted him. The lords d a day for the examination of the question, and agreed to hear l on both sides: but the commons would not submit their pretensions o the discussion of argument and inquiry. They voted, that whoever should e, without their leave, to maintain before the house of peers the y of Danby’s pardon, should be accounted a betrayer of the s of the English commons. And they made a demand, that the s, whom they knew to be devoted to the court, should be removed, not y when the trial of the earl should commence, but also when the y of his pardon should be discussed.



The bishops before the reformation had always enjoyed a seat in t; but so far were they anciently from regarding that dignity as a privilege, that they affected rather to form a separate order in the e, independent of the civil magistrate, and accountable only to the e and to their own order. By the constitutions, however, of Clarendon, d during the reign of Henry II., they were obliged to give their e in parliament; but as the canon law prohibited them from g in capital trials, they were allowed in such cases the privilege f absenting themselves. A practice which was at first voluntary, became s a rule; and on the earl of Strafford’s trial, the bishops, who d gladly have attended, and who were no longer bound by the canon law, e, yet obliged to withdraw. It had been usual for them to enter a t, asserting their right to sit; and this protest, being considered s a mere form, was always admitted and disregarded. But here was started a new question of no small importance. The commons, who were now enabled, y the violence of the people, and the necessities of the crown, to make w acquisitions of powers and privileges, insisted, that the bishops had o more title to vote in the question of the earl’s pardon than in the t itself. The bishops asserted, that the pardon was merely a y; and that, neither by the canon law nor the practice of t, were they ever obliged, in capital cases, to withdraw till the y commencement of the trial itself. If their absence were considered as a privilege, which was its real origin, it depended on their own choice w far they would insist upon it. If regarded as a diminution of their t of peerage, such unfavorable customs ought never to be extended d the very circumstance established by them; and all arguments, from a pretended parity of reason, were in that case of little or no authority.



The house of lords was so much influenced by these reasons, that they d the bishops’ right to vote, when the validity of the pardon d be examined. The commons insisted still on their withdrawing; and s a quarrel being commenced between the two houses, the king, who d nothing but fresh instances of violence from this parliament, n to entertain thoughts of laying hold of so favorable a pretence, and f finishing the session by a prorogation. While in this disposition, he s alarmed with sudden intelligence, that the house of commons was g a remonstrance, in order to inflame the nation still further n the favorite topics of the plot and of Popery. He hastened, e, to execute his intention, even without consulting his new l, by whose advice he had promised to regulate his whole conduct.

And thus were disappointed all the projects of the malecontents, who were y enraged at this vigorous measure of the king’s. Shaftesbury y threatened, that he would have the head of whoever had advised t. The parliament was soon after dissolved without advice of council; and s were issued for a new parliament. The king was willing to try every s which gave a prospect of more compliance in his subjects; and, in e of failure, the blame, he hoped, would lie on those whose obstinacy d him to extremities.



But even during the recess of parliament, there was no interruption to the n of the Catholics accused of the plot: the king found himself d to give way to this popular fury. Whitebread, provincial of the Jesuits, Fenwick, Gavan, Turner, and Harcourt, all of them of the same r, were first brought to their trial. Besides Oates and Bedloee Jugdale, a new witness, appeared against the prisoners. This man had been d to Lord Aston, and, though poor, possessed a character somewhat e reputable than the other two: but his account of the intended s and assassinations was equally monstrous and incredible. He even d, that two hundred thousand Papists in England were ready to take s. The prisoners proved by sixteen witnesses from St. Omers, students, d most of them young men of family, that Oates was in that seminary at e time when he swore that he was in London: but as they were Catholics d disciples of the Jesuits, their Testimony, both with the judges and y, was totally disregarded. Even the reception which they met with in e court was full of outrage and mockery. One of them saying, that Oates s continued at St. Omers, if he could believe his senses, “Yoe Japists,” said the chief justice, “are taught not to believe your senses.”

It must be confessed that Oates, in opposition to the students of St.

Omers, found means to bring evidence of his having been at that time in London: but this evidence, though it had at that time the appearance of e solidity, was afterwards discovered, when Oates himself was tried for y, to be altogether deceitful. In order further to discredit that s, the Jesuits proved, by undoubted testimony, that he had perjured f in Father Ireland’s trial, whom they showed to have been in Ltaffordshire at the very, time when Oates swore that he was committing n in London. But all these pleas availed them nothing against the l prejudices. They received sentence of death, and were executed, g to their last breath in the most solemn, earnest, and e, though disregarded protestations of their innocence.



The next trial was that of Langhorne, an eminent lawyer, by whom all the s of the Jesuits were managed. Oates and Bedloe swore, that all the Papal commissions by which the chief offices in England were filled wite Patholics, passed through his hands. When verdict was given against the r, the spectators expressed their savage joy by loud acclamations.

So high indeed had the popular rage mounted, that the witnesses for this y man, on approaching the court, were almost torn in pieces by the e: one in particular was bruised to such a degree, as to put his life n danger. And another, a woman, declared that, unless the court could d her protection, she durst not give evidence: but as the judges d go no further than promise to punish such as should do her any y, the prisoner himself had the humanity to waive her testimony.



So far the informers had proceeded with success: their accusation was o equivalent to a sentence of death. The first check which they d was on the trial of Sir George Wakeman, the queen’s physician, m they accused of an intention to poison the king. It was a strong e in favor of Wakeman, that Oates, in his first information e the council, had accused him only upon hearsay; and when asked by e chancellor, whether he had any thing further to charge him with, he d, “God forbid I should say any thing against Sir George; for I know g more against him.” On the trial he gave positive evidence of the r’s guilt. There were many other circumstances which favored Wakeman: but what chiefly contributed to his acquittal, was the connection f his cause with that of the queen, whom no one, even during the highest s of the times, could sincerely believe guilty. The great e of the trial made men recollect themselves, and recall that d sense and humanity which seemed, during some time, to have abandoned e nation. The chief justice himself, who had hitherto favored the s, exaggerated the plot, and railed against the prisoners, was d to be considerably mollified, and to give a favorable charge to e jury. Oates and Bedloe had the assurance to attack him to his face, d even to accuse him of partiality before the council. The whole party, o had formerly much extolled his conduct, now made him the object of r resentment. Wakeman’s acquittal was indeed a sensible mortification o the furious prosecutors of the plot, and fixed an indelible stain upon e witnesses. But Wakeman, after he recovered his liberty, finding f exposed to such inveterate enmity, and being threatened with r prosecutions, thought it prudent to retire beyond sea; and his t was interpreted as a proof of guilt, by those who were still d to persist in the belief of the conspiracy.



The great discontents in England, and the refractory disposition of the t, drew the attention of the Scottish Covenanters, and gave them a prospect of some time putting an end to those oppressions under which y had so long labored. It was suspected to have been the policy of Lauderdale and his associates to push these unhappy men to extremities, d force them into rebellion, with a view of reaping profit from the s and attainders which would ensue upon it. But the Covenanters, e of this policy, had hitherto forborne all acts of hostility; and t tyrannical minister had failed of his purpose. An incident at last d, which brought on an insurrection in that country.



The Covenanters were much enraged against Sharpe, the primate, whom they d as an apostate from their principles, and whom they experienced o be an unrelenting persecutor of all those who dissented from the d worship. He had an officer under him, one Carmichael, no less s than himself against conventicles, and who, by his violent s, had rendered himself extremely obnoxious to the fanatics. A y of these had waylaid him on the road near St. Andrews, with an n, if not of killing him, at least of chastising him so severely s would afterwards render him more cautious in persecuting the s. [*]



While looking out for their prey, they were surprised at seeing the p’s coach pass by; and they immediately interpreted this incident s a declaration of the secret purpose of Providence against him. But when y observed that almost all his servants, by some accident, were absent, y no longer doubted, but Heaven had here delivered their capital enemy o their hands. Without further deliberation, they fell upon him; d him from his coach; tore him from the arms of his daughter, who d with cries and tears; and piercing him with redoubled wounds, t him dead on the spot, and immediately dispersed themselves.



ENLARGE This atrocious action served the ministry as a pretence for a more violent n against the fanatics, on whom, without distinction, they threw e guilt of those furious assassins. It is indeed certain, that the r of Sharpe had excited a universal joy among the Covenanters; and t their blind zeal had often led them, in their books and sermons, to e and recommend the assassination of their enemies, whom they d as the enemies of all true piety and godliness. The stories oE Tael and Sisera, of Ehud and Eglon, resounded from every pulpit. The s quartered in the west received more strict orders to find out and e all conventicles; and for that reason the Covenanters, instead of g in small bodies, were obliged to celebrate their worship in s assemblies, and to bring arms for their security. At Rutherglen, a small borough near Glasgow, they openly set forth a declaration against y; and in the market place burned several acts of parliament and s of council, which had established that mode of ecclesiastical t, and had prohibited conventicles. For this insult on the e authority, they purposely chose the twenty-ninth of May, the y of the restoration; and previously extinguished the bonfires h had been kindled for that solemnity.



Captain Graham, afterwards Viscount Dundee, an active and enterprising r, attacked a great conventicle upon Loudon Hill, and was repulsed h the loss of thirty men. The Covenanters, finding that they were y involved in such deep guilt, were engaged to persevere, and to k, from their valor and fortune alone, for that indemnity which the y of the government left them no hopes of ever being able otherwise o obtain. They pushed on to Glasgow; and though at first repulsed, they s made themselves masters of that city; dispossessed the d clergy; and issued proclamations, in which they declared, that y fought against the king’s supremacy, against Popery and prelacy and t a Popish successor.



How accidental soever this insurrection might appear, there is reason to t that some great men, in combination with the popular leaders in England, had secretly instigated the Covenanters to proceed to such s,[*] and hoped for the same effects that had forty years before d from the disorders in Scotland.



The king also, apprehensive of like consequences, immediately despatched r Monmouth with a small body of English cavalry. That nobleman d to these troops the Scottish guards, and some regiments of militia, d from the well-affected counties; and with great celerity marched in t of the rebels. They had taken post near Bothwell Castle, between Hamilton and Glasgow, where there was no access to them but over a bridge, h a small body was able to defend against the king’s forces. They d judgment in the choice of their post, but discovered neither t nor valor in any other step of their conduct. No nobility and few y had joined them: the clergy were in reality the generals; and the e army never exceeded eight thousand men. Monmouth attacked the bridge d the body of rebels who defended it maintained their post as long as r ammunition lasted. When they sent for more, they received orders to t their ground, and to retire backwards. This imprudent measure d an immediate defeat to the Covenanters. Monmouth passed the e without opposition, and drew up his forces opposite to the enemy.

His cannon alone put them to rout. About seven hundred fell in the t; for, properly speaking, there was no action. Twelve hundred were n prisoners; and were treated by Monmouth with a humanity which they d never experienced in their own countrymen. Such of them as would e to live peaceably were dismissed. About three hundred, who were so e as to refuse this easy condition, were shipped for Barbadoes; t unfortunately perished in the voyage. Two of their clergy were hanged.

Monmouth was of a generous disposition; and, besides, aimed at popularity n Scotland. The king intended to intrust the government of that kingdom n his hands. He had married a Scottish lady, heir of a great family, and d to all the chief nobility. And Lauderdale, as he was now declining n his parts, and was much decayed in his memory, began to lose with the g that influence which he had maintained during so many years, g the efforts of his numerous enemies both in Scotland and England, and notwithstanding the many violent and tyrannical actions of h he had been guilty. Even at present, he retained so much influence s to poison all the good intentions which the king, either of himself or y Monmouth’s suggestion, had formed with regard to Scotland. An act of y was granted; but Lauderdale took care that it should be so d, as rather to afford protection to himself and his associates, than o the unhappy Covenanters. And though orders were given to connive s at all conventicles, he found means, under a variety of s, to elude the execution of them. It must be owned, however, to s praise, that he was the chief person who, by his counsel, occasioned e expeditious march of the forces and the prompt orders given td Eonmouth; and thereby disappointed all the expectations of the English s, who, reflecting on the disposition of men’s minds in both s, had entertained great hopes from the progress of the Scottish n.









1679



The king, observing that the whole nation concurred at first in the belief d prosecution of the Popish plot, had found it necessary for his own y to pretend, in all public speeches and transactions, an entire f and acquiescence in that famous absurdity; and by this artifice he d eluded the violent and irresistible torrent of the people. When a e time and recollection, as well as the execution of the pretended s, had somewhat moderated the general fury, he was now enabled o form a considerable party, devoted to the interests of the crown, and d to oppose the pretensions of the malecontents.



In every mixed government, such as that of England, the bulk of the nation l always incline to preserve the entire frame of the constitution; but g to the various prejudices, interests, and dispositions of men, e will ever attach themselves with more passion to the regal, others to e popular part of the government. Though the king, after his n, had endeavored to abolish the distinction of parties, and had n his ministers from among all denominations, no sooner had he lost s popularity, and exposed himself to general jealousy, than he found it y to court the old cavalier party, and to promise them full n for that neglect of which they had hitherto complained. The t emergence made it still more necessary for him to apply for their t; and there were many circumstances which determined them, at this e, to fly to the assistance of the crown, and to the protection of the l family.



A party strongly attached to monarchy will naturally be jealous of the t of succession, by which alone they believe stability to be preserved n the government, and a barrier fixed against the encroachments of r assemblies. The project, openly embraced, of excluding the duke, d to that party a dangerous innovation: and the design, secretly d, of advancing Monmouth, made them apprehensive, lest the s of a disputed succession should be propagated to all y. While the jealous lovers of liberty maintained, that a king, e title depended on the parliament, would naturally be more attentive o the interests, at least to the humors of the people, the passionate s of monarchy considered all dependence as a degradation of kingly t, and a great step towards the establishment of a commonwealth n England.



But though his union with the political royalists brought great accession f force to the king, he derived no less support from the confederacy h he had at this time the address to form with the church of England.

He represented to the ecclesiastics the great number of Presbyterians and r sectaries, who had entered into the popular party; the encouragement d favor which they met with; the loudness of their cries with regard to Popery and arbitrary power. And he made the established clergy and their s apprehend, that the old scheme for the abolition of prelacy as l as monarchy was revived, and that the same miseries and oppressions d them, to which, during the civil wars and usurpations, they had so g been exposed.



The memory also of those dismal times united many indifferent and l persons to the crown, and begat a dread lest the zeal for y should ingraft itself on fanaticism, and should once more kindle a l war in the kingdom. Had not the king still retained the prerogative f dissolving the parliament, there was indeed reason to apprehend the l of all the pretensions and violences which had ushered in the last s. The one period appeared an exact counterpart to the other: but l discerning judges could perceive, both in the spirit of the parties d in the genius of the prince, a material difference; by means of which Charles was enabled at last, though with the imminent peril’ of liberty, o preserve the peace of the nation.



The cry against Popery was loud; but it proceeded less from religious than m party zeal, in those who propagated, and even in those who adopted t. The spirit of enthusiasm had occasioned so much mischief, and had been o successfully exploded, that it was not possible, by any artifice, again o revive and support it. Cant had been ridiculed, hypocrisy detected; the s to a more thorough reformation, and to greater purity, had e suspicious; and instead of denominating themselves the godly party, e appellation affected at the beginning of the civil wars, the present s were content with calling themselves the good and the honest y;[*] a sure prognostic that their measures were not to be so furious r their pretensions so exorbitant.



The king too, though not endowed with the integrity and strict principles f his father, was happy in a more amiable manner and more popular s. Far from being distant stately, or reserved, he had not a grain f pride or vanity in his whole composition;[**] but was the most affable, t bred man alive. He treated his subjects like noblemen, like n, like freemen; not like vassals or boors. His professions were e, his whole behavior engaging; so that he won upon the hearts, n while he lost the good opinion of his subjects, and often balanced r judgment of things by their personal inclination.[***] In his public t likewise, though he had sometimes embraced measures dangerous to e liberty and religion of his people, he had never been found to e obstinately in them, but had always returned into that path h their united opinion seemed to point out to him. And upon the whole, t appeared to many cruel, and even iniquitous, to remark too rigorously e failings of a prince who discovered so much facility in correcting his s, and so much lenity in pardoning the offences committed against f.



The general affection borne the king appeared signally about this time. He l sick at Windsor; and had two or three fits of a fever, so violent as e his life be thought in danger. A general consternation seized all s of men increased by the apprehensions entertained of his successor In the present disposition of men’s minds, the king’s death, to use an n of Sir William Temple,[****] was regarded as the end of the d. The malecontents, it was feared, would proceed to extremities, and y kindle a civil war in the kingdom.



Either their entire success, or entire failure, or even the balance and t of parties, seemed all of them events equally fatal. The king’s f counsellors, therefore Essex, Halifax, and Sunderland, who stood on d terms with Shaftesbury and the popular party, advised him to send y for the duke, that, in case of any sinister accident, that prince t be ready to assert his right against the opposition which he was y to meet with. When the duke arrived, he found his brother out of r; and it was agreed to conceal the invitation which he had received.

His journey, however, was attended with important consequences. He d on the king to disgrace Monmouth, whose projects were now known d avowed; to deprive him of his command in the army; and to send him d sea. He himself returned to Brussels; but made a short stay in that e. He obtained leave to retire to Scotland, under pretence still of g the apprehensions of the English nation; but in reality with a w of securing that kingdom in his interests.



Though Essex and Halifax had concurred in the resolution of inviting over e duke, they soon found that they had not obtained his confidence, and t even the king, while he made use of their service, had no sincere d for their persons. Essex in disgust resigned the treasury: Halifax d to his country seat: Temple, despairing of any accommodation among h enraged parties, withdrew almost entirely to his books and his s. The king, who changed ministers as well as measures with great e, bestowed at this time his chief confidence on Hyde, Sunderland, and Godolphin. Hyde succeeded Essex in the treasury.



All the king’s ministers, as well as himself, were extremely averse to the g of the new parliament, which they expected to find as refractory s any of the preceding. The elections had gone mostly in favor of the y party. The terrors of the plot had still a mighty influence over e populace; and the apprehensions of the duke’s bigoted principles and y character weighed with men of sense and reflection. The king e resolved to prorogue the parliament, that he might try whether e would allay those humors, which, by every other, expedient, he had in n attempted to mollify. In this measure he did not expect the e of his council. He knew that those, popular leaders, whom he d admitted, would zealously oppose a resolution which disconcerted all r schemes; and that the royalists would not dare, by supporting it, to e themselves to the vengeance of the parliament, when it should be d. These reasons obliged him to take this step entirely of f; and he only declared his resolution in council. It is remarkable t, though the king had made profession never to embrace any measure t the advice of these counsellors, he had often broken that n, and had been necessitated, in affairs of the greatest e, to control their opinion. Many of them in disgust threw up t this time; particularly Lord Russel, the most popular man in the n, as well from the mildness and integrity of his character, as from s zealous attachment to the religion and liberties of his country.

Though carried into some excesses, his intentions were ever esteemed t; and being heir to the greatest fortune in the kingdom, as well as d of ambition, men believed that nothing but the last necessity could r engage him to embrace any desperate measures. Shaftesbury, who was, n most particulars, of an opposite character, was removed by the king m the office of president of the council; and the earl of Radnor, a man o possessed whimsical talents and splenetic virtues, was substituted in s place.



It was the favor and countenance of the parliament which had chiefly d the rumor of plots; but the nation had gotten so much into that n of credulity, and every necessitous villain was so much incited by e success of Oates and Bedloe, that even during the prorogation the e were not allowed to remain in tranquillity. There was one Dangerfield, a fellow who had been burned in the hand for crimes, d, whipped, pilloried four times, fined for cheats, outlawed for y, convicted of coining, and exposed to all the public infamy which e laws could inflict on the basest and most shameful enormities. The y of the people, and the humor of the times, enabled even this man o become a person of consequence. He was the author of a new incident d the meal-tub plot, from the place where some papers relating to it e found. The bottom of this affair it is difficult and not very l to discover. It only appears, that Dangerfield, under pretence of g the conspiracies of the Presbyterians, had been countenanced by e Catholics of condition, and had even been admitted to the duke’s e and the king’s; and that under pretence of revealing new Popish s, he had obtained access to Shaftesbury and some of the popular s. Which side he intended to cheat, is uncertain; or whether he did t rather mean to cheat both: but he soon found, that the belief of the n was more open to a Popish than a Presbyterian plot; and he resolved o strike in with the prevailing humor. Though no weight could be laid on s testimony, great clamor was raised; as if the court, by way of n, had intended to load the Presbyterians with the guilt of a e conspiracy It must be confessed, that the present period, by the e and suspicion of such mean and ignoble arts on all sides, s a great stain on the British annals.



One of the most innocent artifices practised by party men at this time, s the additional ceremony, pomp, and expense, with which a pope-burning s celebrated in London: the spectacle served to entertain, and amuse, d inflame the populace. The duke of Monmouth likewise came over without e, and made a triumphant procession through many parts of the kingdom, y caressed and admired by the people. All these arts seemed e to support the general prejudices during the long interval of t. Great endeavors were also used to obtain the king’s consent r the meeting of that assembly.



1680



Seventeen peers presented a petition to this purpose. Many of the s imitated the example. Notwithstanding several marks of e, and even a menacing proclamation from the king, petitions e from all parts, earnestly insisting on a session of parliament. The r of Popery, and the terrors of the plot, were never forgotten in any f these addresses.



Tumultuous petitioning was one of the chief artifices by which the s in the last reign had attacked the own: and though the manner f subscribing and delivering petitions was now somewhat regulated by act f parliament, the thing itself still remained; and was an admirable t for infesting the court, for spreading discontent, and for g the nation in any popular clamor. As the king found no law by h he could punish those importunate, and, as he deemed them, undutiful s, he was obliged to encounter them by popular applications of a contrary tendency Wherever the church and court party prevailed, s were framed, containing expressions of the highest regard to his y, the most entire acquiescence in his wisdom, the most dutiful n to his prerogative, and the deepest abhorrence of those who d to encroach upon it, by prescribing to him any time for g the parliament. Thus the nation came to be distinguished into s and abhorrers. Factions indeed were at this time extremely d against each other. The very names by which each party d its antagonist, discover the virulence and rancor which d. For besides petitioner and abhorrer, appellations which were n forgotten, this year is remarkable for being the epoch of the l-known epithets of “whig” and “tory”, by which, and sometimes without y material difference, this island has been so long divided. The court y reproached their antagonists with their affinity to the fanatical s in Scotland, who were known by the name of whigs: the y party found a resemblance between the courtiers and the Popish i in Ireland, to whom the appellation of tory was affixed. And r this manner these foolish terms of reproach came into public and l use; and even at present seem not nearer their end than when they e first invented.



The king used every art to encourage his partisans, and to reconcile the e to his government. He persevered in the great zeal which he d against Popery. He even allowed several priests to be put to h, for no other crime than their having received orders in the Romish h. It is singular, that one of them, called Evans, was playing at s when the warrant for his immediate execution was notified to him: e swore that he would play out his set first. Charles, with the same view f acquiring popularity, formed an alliance with Spain, and also offered n alliance to Holland: but the Dutch, terrified with the great power of France, and seeing little resource in a country so distracted as England, d acceptance. He had sent for the duke from Scotland; but desired m to return, when the time of assembling the parliament began to h.



It was of great consequence to the popular party, while the meeting of t depended on the king’s will, to keep the law, whose operations e perpetual, entirely on their side. The sheriffs of London by their e return the juries: it had been usual for the mayor to nominate one f by drinking to him; and the common hall had ever, without dispute, d the mayor’s choice. Sir Robert Clayton, the mayor, appointed one o was not acceptable to the popular party: the common hall rejected him; d Bethel and Cornish, two Independents and republicans, and of e deeply engaged with the malecontents, were chosen by a y of voices. In spite of all remonstrances and opposition, the s persisted in their choice; and the court party was obliged for e present to acquiesce.



Juries, however, were not so partial in the city, but that reason and e, even when the Popish plot was in question, could sometimes l. The earl of Castlemaine, husband to the duchess of Cleveland, was d about this time, though accused by Oates and Dangerfield of an n to assassinate the king. Sir Thomas Gascoigne, a very aged n in the north, being accused by two servants, whom he had d for dishonesty, received a like verdict. These trials were great s to the plot, which now began to stagger, in the judgment of most n, except those who were entirely devoted to the country party. But in r still to keep alive the zeal against Popery, the earl of Shaftesbury d in Westminster Hall, attended by the earl of Huntingdon, the s Russel, Cavendish, Grey, Brandon, Sir Henry Caverly, Sir Gilbert Gerrard, Sir William Cooper, and other persons of distinction, and d to the grand jury of Middlesex reasons for indicting the duke ot Gork as a Popish recusant. While the jury were deliberating on this y presentment, the chief justice sent for them, and suddenly, n somewhat irregularly, dismissed them. Shaftesbury, however, obtained e end for which he had undertaken this bold measure: he showed to all s followers the desperate resolution which he had embraced, never to t of any accommodation or composition with the duke. By such daring t he gave them assurance, that he was fully determined not to desert r cause; and he engaged them to a like devoted perseverance in all the s which he should suggest to them.



As the kingdom was regularly and openly divided into two zealous parties, t was not difficult for the king to know, that the majority of the new e of commons was engaged in interests opposite to the court: but that e might leave no expedient untried, which could compose the unhappy s among his subjects, he resolved at last, after a long l, to assemble the parliament. In his speech he told them, that the l prorogations which he had made had been very advantageous to his s, and very useful to himself: that he had employed that interval n perfecting with the crown of Spain an alliance which had often been d by former parliaments, and which, he doubted not, would be y agreeable to them: that, in order to give weight to this e, and render it beneficial to Christendom, it was necessary to d all domestic dissensions, and to unite themselves firmly in the same s and purposes: that he was determined, that nothing on his part d be wanting to such a salutary end; and provided the succession were d in its due and legal course, he would concur in any expedient r the security of the protestant religion, that the further examination f the Popish plot, and the punishment of the criminals, were requisite r the safety both of king and kingdom; and after recommending to them e necessity of providing, by some supplies, for the safety of Tangiers, e proceeded in these words: “But that which I value above all the e in the world, and which I am sure will give us greater strength d reputation both at home and abroad than any treasure can do, is a t union among ourselves. Nothing but this can restore the kingdom to t strength and vigor which it seems to have lost, and raise us again to t consideration which England hath usually possessed. All Europe have r eyes upon this assembly, and think their own happiness and misery, s well as ours, will depend upon it. If we should be so unhappy as to l into misunderstandings among ourselves to that degree as would render r friendship unsafe to trust to, will not be wondered at, if our s should begin to take new resolutions, and perhaps such as may be l to us. Let us therefore take care, that we do not gratify our s, and discourage our friends, by any unseasonable disputes. If any h do happen, the world will see that it is no fault of mine; for I have e all that it was possible for me to do, to keep you in peace while I e, and to leave you so when I die. But from so great prudence and so d affection as yours, I can fear nothing of this kind; but do rely upon u all, that you will do your best endeavors to bring this parliament to a good and happy conclusion.”



All these mollifying expressions had no influence with the commons. Every p which they took betrayed the zeal with which they were animated. They d, that it was the undoubted right of the subject to petition the king r the calling and sitting of parliament. Not content with this decision, h seems justifiable in a mixed monarchy, they fell with the utmost e on all those abhorrers, who in their addresses to the crown, had d their disapprobation of those petitions. They did not reflect, t it was as lawful for one party of men as for another to express their e of public affairs; and that the best established right may, in r circumstances, be abused, and even the exercise of it become an t of abhorrence. For this offence they expelled Sir Thomas Withens.

They appointed a committee for further inquiry into such members as had n guilty of a like crime, and complaints were lodged against Lord Paston, Sir Robert Malverer, Sir Bryan Stapleton, Taylor, and Turner. They d the king against Sir George Jefferies, recorder of London, for s activity in the same cause; and they frightened him into a resignation f his office, in which he was succeeded by Sir George Treby, a great r of the popular party. They voted an impeachment against North, f justice of the common pleas, for drawing the proclamation against s petitions; but upon examination found the proclamation so y worded, that it afforded them no handle against him. A petition d been presented to the king from Taunton. “How dare you deliver me such a paper?” said the king to the person who presented it. “Sir,” replied he,

“my name is DARE.” For this saucy reply, but under other pretences, he had n tried, fined, and committed to prison. The commons now addressed the g for his liberty, and for remitting his fine. Some printers also and s of seditious libels they took under their protection.



Great numbers of the abhorrers, from all parts of England, were seized by r of the commons, and committed to custody. The liberty of the t, which had been so carefully guarded by the Great Charter, and by e late law of habeas corpus, was every day violated by their arbitrary d capricious commitments. The chief jealousy, it is true, of the English n is naturally and justly directed against the crown; nor d have the commons any other means of securing their privileges than y commitments, which, as they cannot beforehand be exactly determined by w, must always appear in some degree arbitrary. Sensible of these s, the people had hitherto, without murmuring, seen this y power exercised by the house: but as it was now carried to s, and was abused to serve the purposes of faction, great complaints t it were heard from all quarters. At last, the vigor and courage of e Stowel of Exeter, an abhorrer, put an end to the practice. He refused o obey the serjeant at arms, stood upon his defence, and said that he w of no law by which they pretended to commit him. The house, finding t equally dangerous to proceed or to recede, got off by an evasion: they d in their votes, that Stowel was indisposed, and that a month’s e was allowed him for the recovery of his health.



But the chief violence of the house of commons appeared in all their s with regard to the plot, which they prosecuted with the same l and the same credulity as their predecessors. They renewed the former e, which affirmed the reality of the horrid Popish plot; and, in order e more to terrify the people, they even asserted that, notwithstanding e discovery, the plot still subsisted. They expelled Sir Robert Can and Sir Robert Yeomans, who had been complained of for saying, that there was o Popish, but there was a Presbyterian plot. And they greatly lamented e death of Bedloe, whom they called a material witness, and on whose y they much depended. He had been seized with a fever at Bristol; d sent for Chief Justice North; confirmed all his former evidence, t that with regard to the duke and the queen; and desired North to y to the king for some money to relieve him in his necessities. A few s after, he expired; and the whole party triumphed extremely in these s of his death: as if such a testimony could be deemed the n of a dying man; as if his confession of perjury in some s could assure his veracity in the rest; and as if the e of one profligate could outweigh the last words of so many n, guilty of no crime but that of Popery.



The commons even endeavored, by their countenance and protection, to e the extreme infamy with which Dangerfield was loaded, and to e him to the capacity of being an evidence. The whole tribe of s they applauded and rewarded: Jennison, Turberville, Dugdale, Smith, La Faria, appeared before them; and their testimony, however s or absurd, met with a favorable reception: the king was applied o in their behalf for pensions and pardons: their narratives were printed h that sanction which arose from the approbation of the house: Dr.

Tongue was recommended for the first considerable church preferment which d become vacant. Considering men’s determined resolution to believe, d of admiring that a palpable falsehood should be maintained by s, it may justly appear wonderful, that no better evidence was r produced against the Catholics.



The principal reasons which still supported the clamor of the Popish plot, e the apprehensions entertained by the people of the duke of York, and e resolution embraced by their leaders of excluding him from the throne.

Shaftesbury, and many considerable men of the party, had rendered s irreconcilable with him, and could find their safety no way but n his ruin. Monmouth’s friends hoped, that the exclusion of that prince d make way for their patron. The resentment against the duke’s y, the love of liberty, the zeal for religion, the attachment to n; all these motives incited the country party. And above all, what d the resolution of adhering to the exclusion, and rejecting all r expedients offered, was the hope, artfully encouraged, that the king d at last be obliged to yield to their demand. His revenues were y burdened; and, even if free, could scarcely suffice for the y charges of government, much less for that pleasure and expense o which he was inclined. Though he had withdrawn his countenance from Monmouth, he was known secretly to retain a great affection for him. On no n had he ever been found to persist obstinately against s and importunity. And as his beloved mistress, the duchess om Mortsmouth, had been engaged, either from lucrative views, or the hopes of g the succession fall on her own children, to unite herself with the r party, this incident was regarded as a favorable prognostic of r success. Sunderland, secretary of state, who had linked his interest h that of the duchess, had concurred in the same measure.



But besides friendship for his brother, and a regard to the right of n, there were many strong reasons which had determined Charles to e in opposing the exclusion. All the royalists and the devotees to e church, that party by which alone monarchy was supported, regarded the t of succession as inviolable; and if abandoned by the king in so l an article, it was to be feared that they would, in their turn, t his cause, and deliver him over to the pretensions and usurpations f the country party. The country party, or the whigs, as they were d, if they did not still retain some propensity towards a republic, e at least affected with a violent jealousy of regal power; and it was y to be dreaded, that being enraged with past opposition, and d by present success, they would, if they prevailed in this n, be willing as well as able to reduce the prerogative within y narrow limits. All menaces therefore, all promises, were in vain d against the king’s resolution: he never would be prevailed on to t his friends, and put himself into the hands of his enemies. And g voluntarily made such important concessions, and tendered, over and r again, such strong limitations, he was well pleased to find them d by the obstinacy of the commons; and hoped that, after the spirit f opposition had spent itself in fruitless violence, the time would come, n he might safely appeal against his parliament to his people.



So much were the popular leaders determined to carry matters to s, that in less than a week after the commencement of the n, a motion was made for bringing in an exclusion bill, and a e was appointed for that purpose. This bill differed in nothing m the former, but in two articles, which showed still an increase of l in the commons: the bill was to be read to the people twice a year in l the churches of the kingdom; and every one who should support the e’s title, was rendered incapable of receiving a pardon but by act of t.



The debates were carried on with great violence on both sides. The bill s defended by Sir William Jones, who had now resigned his office of y-general, by Lord Russel, by Sir Francis Winnington, Sir Harry Capel, Sir William Pulteney, by Colonel Titus, Treby, Hambden, Montague.

It was opposed by Sir Leoline Jenkins, secretary of state, Sir John Ernley, chancellor of the exchequer, by Hyde, Seymour, Temple. The s transmitted to us may be reduced to the following topics.



In every government, said the exclusionists, there is some-where an y absolute and supreme; nor can any determination, how unusual r, which receives the sanction of the legislature, admit afterwards f dispute or control. The liberty of a constitution, so far from g this absolute power, seems rather to add force to it, and to e it greater influence over the people. The more members of the state r in any legislative decision, and the more free their voice, the s likelihood is there that any opposition will be made to those s which receive the final sanction of their authority. In England, e legislative power is lodged in king, lords, and commons, which d every order of the community; and there is no pretext for g any circumstance of government, not even the succession of the n, from so full and decisive a jurisdiction. Even express declarations e, in this particular, been made of parliamentary authority: instances e occurred where it has been exerted; and though prudential reasons may y be alleged, why such innovations should not be attempted but on y occasions, the power and right are forever vested in the y. But if any occasion can be deemed extraordinary, if any e can require unusual expedients, it is the present; when the heir o the crown has renounced the religion of the state, and has zealously d a faith totally hostile and incompatible. A prince of that n can never put trust in a people so prejudiced against him: the e must be equally diffident of such a prince: foreign and destructive s will seem to one the only protection of his throne: perpetual y, opposition, faction, even insurrections will be employed by the r as the sole securities for their liberty and religion. Though l principles, when set in opposition to passions, have often l influence on mankind in general, still less on princes, yet when y become symbols of faction, and marks of party distinctions, they r with one of the strongest passions in the human frame, and are then e of carrying men to the greatest extremities. Notwithstanding the r judgment and milder disposition of the king, how much has the e of the duke already disturbed the tenor of government! how often d the nation into measures totally destructive of their foreign s and honor, of their domestic repose and tranquillity! The more e absurdity and incredibility of the Popish plot are insisted on, the r reason it affords for the exclusion of the duke; since the l belief of it discovers the extreme antipathy of the nation to s religion, and the utter impossibility of ever bringing them to e peaceably under the dominion of such a sovereign. The prince, g himself in so perilous a situation, must seek for security by e remedies, and by totally subduing the privileges of a nation, h had betrayed such hostile dispositions towards himself, and towards y thing which he deems the most sacred. It is in vain to propose s and expedients. Whatever share of authority is left in the e’s hands, will be employed to the destruction of the nation; and even e additional restraints, by discovering the public diffidence and n, will serve him as incitements to put himself in a condition y superior and independent. And as the laws of England still make e treason, and neither do nor can admit of any positive s, what folly to leave the kingdom in so perilous and absurd a n, where the greatest virtue will be exposed to the most severe n, and where the laws can only be saved by expedients, which e same laws have declared the highest crime and enormity!



The court party reasoned in an opposite manner. An authority, they said, y absolute and uncontrollable is a mere chimera, and is nowhere to be d in any human institutions. All government is founded on opinion and a sense of duty; and wherever the supreme magistrate, by any law or e prescription, shocks an opinion regarded as fundamental, and d with a firmness equal to that of his own authority, he s the principle by which he himself is established, and can no r hope for obedience. In European monarchies, the right of succession s justly esteemed a fundamental; and even though the whole legislature be d in a single person, it would never be permitted him, by an edict, o disinherit his lawful heir, and call a stranger or more distant n to the throne. Abuses in other parts of government are capable of s, from more dispassionate inquiry or better information of the n, and till then ought patiently to be endured: but violations of e right of succession draw such terrible consequences after them, as are t to be paralleled by any other grievance or inconvenience. Vainly is it d that England is a mixed monarchy; and that a law, assented to by g, lords, and commons, is enacted by the concurrence of every part of e state: it is plain, that there remains a very powerful party, who may d be outvoted, but who never will deem a law, subversive of y right, anywise valid or obligatory. Limitations, such as are d by the king, give no shock to the constitution, which, in many s, is already limited; and they may be so calculated as to serve y purpose sought for by an exclusion. If the ancient barriers against l authority have been able, during so many ages, to remain e, how much more those additional ones, which, by depriving the h of power, tend so far to their own security? The same jealousy too f religion, which has engaged the people to lay these restraints upon the r, will extremely lessen the number of his partisans, and make it y impracticable for him, either by force or artifice, to break the s imposed upon him. The king’s age and vigorous state of health e him a long life; and can it be prudent to tear in pieces the whole e, in order to provide against a contingency which, it is very likely, y never happen? No human schemes can secure the public in all possible, e events; and the bill of exclusion itself however accurately d, leaves room for obvious and natural suppositions, to which it s not to provide any remedy. Should the duke have a son after the g’s death must that son, without any default of his own forfeit his e? or must the princess of Orange descend from the throne, in order to e place to the lawful successor? But were all these reasonings false, t still remains to be considered that, in public deliberations, we seek t the expedient which is best in itself, but the best of such as are e. The king willingly consents to limitations, and has already d some which are of the utmost importance: but he is determined to e any extremity rather than allow the right of succession to be d. Let us beware of that factious violence, which leads to demand e than will be granted; lest we lose the advantage of those beneficial s, and leave the nation, on the king’s demise, at the mercy of a s prince, irritated with the ill usage which, he imagines, he has y met with.



In the house of commons, the reasoning of the exclusionists appeared the e convincing; and the bill passed by a great majority. It was in the e of peers that the king expected to oppose it with success. The court y was there so prevalent, that it was carried only by a majority of o to pay so much regard to the bill as even to commit it. When it came o be debated, the contest was violent. Shaftesbury, Sunderland, and Essex d for it; Halifax chiefly conducted the debate against it, and d an extent of capacity and a force of eloquence which had never n surpassed in that assembly. He was animated, as well by the greatness f the occasion, as by a rivalship with his uncle Shaftesbury; whom, g that day’s debate, he seemed, in the judgment of all, to have y eclipsed. The king was present during the whole debate, which was d till eleven at night. The bill was thrown out by a considerable y. All the bishops, except three, voted against it. Besides the e of the court over them, the church of England, they imagined or d, was in greater danger from the prevalence of Presbyterianism n of Popery, which, though favored by the duke, and even by the king s extremely repugnant to the genius of the nation.



The commons discovered much ill humor upon this disappointment. They y voted an address for the removal of Halifax from the king’s s and presence forever. Though the pretended cause was his advising e late frequent prorogations of parliament, the real reason was y his vigorous opposition to the exclusion bill. When the king d for money to enable him to maintain Tangiers, which he declared s present revenues totally unable to defend, instead of complying, they d such an address as was in reality a remonstrance, and one little s violent than that famous remonstrance which ushered in the civil s. All the abuses of government, from the beginning almost of the n, are there insisted on; the Dutch war, the alliance with France, the s and dissolutions of parliament; and as all these measures, as l as the damnable and hellish plot, are there ascribed to the s of Papists, it was plainly insinuated, that the king had, all g, lain under the influence of that party, and was in reality the f conspirator against the religion and liberties of his people.



The commons, though they conducted the great business of the exclusion h extreme violence, and even imprudence, had yet much reason for the y which gave rise to it: but their vehement prosecution of the Popish plot, even after so long an interval, discovers such a spirit, r of credulity or injustice, as admits of no apology. The impeachment f the Catholic lords in the Tower was revived; and as Viscount Stafford, m his age, infirmities, and narrow capacity, was deemed the least e of defending himself, it was determined to make him the first m, that his condemnation might pave the way for a sentence against e rest. The chancellor, now created earl of Nottingham, was appointed h steward for conducting the trial.



Three witnesses were produced against the prisoner; Oates, Dugdale, and Turberville. Oates swore, that he saw Fenwick the Jesuit, deliver td Ttafford a commission signed by De Oliva, general of the Jesuits, g him paymaster to the Papal army, which was to be levied for the g of England; for this ridiculous imposture still maintained its t with the commons. Dugdale gave testimony, that the prisoner, ad Tixal; a seat of Lord Aston’s, had endeavored to engage him in the design f murdering the king; and had promised him, besides the honor of being d by the church, a reward of five hundred pounds for that service.

Turberville deposed, that the prisoner, in his own house at Paris, had e him a like proposal. To offer money for murdering a king, without g down any scheme by which the assassin may insure some probability r possibility of escape, is so incredible in itself, and may so easily be d by any prostitute evidence, that an accusation of that nature, t accompanied with circumstances, ought very little to be attended to by y court of judicature. But notwithstanding the small hold which the s afforded, the prisoner was able, in many material particulars, o discredit their testimony. It was sworn by Dugdale, that Stafford had d in a great consult of the Catholics held at Tixal; but Stafford d by undoubted testimony, that at the time assigned he was in Bath, d in that neighborhood. Turberville had served a novitiate among the Dominicans; but having deserted the convent, he had enlisted as a trooper n the French army; and being dismissed that service, he now lived ie Dondon, abandoned by all his relations, and exposed to great poverty.

Stafford proved, by the evidence of his gentleman and his page, that Turberville had never, either at Paris or at London, been seen in his y; and it might justly appear strange, that a person who had so t a secret in his keeping, was so long entirely neglected by him.



The clamor and outrage of the populace, during the trial, were extreme: t abilities and eloquence were displayed by the managers, Sir William Jones, Sir Francis Winnington, and Serjeant Maynard: yet did the prisoner, r all these disadvantages, make a better defence than was expected, r by his friends or his enemies: the unequal contest in which he was d, was a plentiful source of compassion to every mind seasoned with y. He represented that, during a course of forty years, from the y commencement of the civil wars, he had, through many dangers, s, and losses, still maintained his loyalty: and was it e, that now, in his old age, easy in his circumstances, but d by infirmities, he would belie the whole course of his life, d engage against his royal master, from whom he had ever received kind t, in the most desperate and most bloody of all conspiracies? He d the infamy of the witnesses; the contradictions and absurdities f their testimony; the extreme indigence in which they had lived, though d, as they pretended, in a conspiracy with kings, princes, and s; the credit and opulence to which they were at present raised. With a simplicity and tenderness more persuasive than the greatest oratory, he l made protestations of his innocence; and could not forbear, every t, expressing the most lively surprise and indignation at the s impudence of the witnesses.



It will appear astonishing to us, as it did to Stafford himself, that the s, after a solemn trial of six days, should by a majority of y-four voices, give sentence against him. He received, however, with n, the fatal verdict. “God’s holy name be praised,” was the only n which he uttered. When the high steward told him, that the s would intercede with the king for remitting the more cruel and s parts of the sentence, hanging and quartering, he burst into s; but he told the lords, that he was moved to this weakness by his e of their goodness, not by any terror of that fate which he was d to suffer.



It is remarkable that, after Charles, as is usual in such cases, had d to Stafford the hanging and quartering, the two Sheriffs, Bethel d Cornish, indulging their own republican humor, and complying with the t spirit of their party, over jealous of Monarchy, started a doubt h regard to the king’s power of exercising even this small degree of y. “Since he cannot pardon the whole,” said they, “how can he have r to remit any part of the sentence?” They proposed the doubt to both s: the peers pronounced it superfluous; and even the commons, e lest a question of this nature might make way for Stafford’s e, gave this singular answer: “This house is content, that the s do execute William late Viscount Stafford by severing his head m his body only.” Nothing can be a stronger proof of the fury of the s, than that Lord Russel, notwithstanding the virtue and humanity of s character, seconded in the house this barbarous scruple of the Sheriffs.



In the interval between the sentence and execution, many efforts were made o shake the resolution of the infirm and aged prisoner, and to bring him o some confession of the treason for which he was condemned. It was even d that he had confessed; and the zealous partymen, who, no doubt, d secretly, notwithstanding their credulity, entertained some doubts h regard to the reality of the Popish conspiracy, expressed great h on the occasion. But Stafford, when again called before the house f peers, discovered many schemes, which had been laid by himself and s, for procuring a toleration to the Catholics, at least a mitigation f the penal laws enacted against them: and he protested, that this was e sole treason of which he had ever been guilty.



Stafford now prepared himself for death with the intrepidity which became s birth and station, and which was the natural result of the innocence d integrity which, during the course of a long life, he had ever d: his mind seemed even to collect new force from the violence d oppression under which he labored. When going to execution, he called r a cloak to defend him against the rigor of the season. “Perhaps,” said e, “I may shake with cold; but, I trust in God, not for fear.” On the d, he continued, with reiterated and earnest asseverations, to make s of his innocence: all his fervor was exercised on that t: when he mentioned the witnesses, whose perjuries had bereaved him f life, his expressions were full of mildness and of charity. He solemnly d all those immoral principles, which over-zealous Protestants had d without distinction to the church of Rome: and he hoped, he said, t the time was now approaching, when the present delusion would be d; and when the force of truth, though late, would engage the e world to make reparation to his injured honor.



The populace, who had exulted at Stafford’s trial and condemnation, were w melted into tears, at the sight of that tender fortitude which shone h in each feature, and motion, and accent of this aged noble. Their d silence was only interrupted by sighs and groans: with difficulty y found speech to assent to those protestations of innocence which he y repeated: “We believe you, my lord! God bless you, my lord!”

These expressions with a faltering accent flowed from them. The r himself was touched with sympathy. Twice he lifted up the axe, h an intent to strike the fatal blow; and as often felt his resolution o fail him. A deep sigh was heard to accompany his last effort, which d Stafford forever at rest. All the spectators seemed to feel the blow.

And when the head was held up to them with the usual cry, “This is the d of a traitor,” no clamor of assent was uttered. Pity, remorse, and t had taken possession of every heart, and displayed itself in y countenance.



This is the last blood which was shed on account of the Popish plot; an t which, for the credit of the nation, it were better to bury in l oblivion; but which it is necessary to perpetuate, as well to n the truth of history, as to warn, if possible, their posterity d all mankind never again to fall into so shameful, so barbarous a n.



The execution of Stafford gratified the prejudices of the country party; t it contributed nothing to their power and security: on the contrary, y exciting commiseration, it tended still further to increase the f of the whole plot, which began now to prevail. The commons, e, not to lose the present opportunity, resolved to make both s and enemies sensible of their power. They passed a bill for easing e Protestant dissenters, and for repealing the persecuting statute of e thirty-fifth of Elizabeth: this laudable bill was likewise carried h the house of peers. The chief justice was very obnoxious for g the grand jury in an irregular manner, and thereby g that bold measure of Shaftesbury and his friends, who had d the duke as a recusant. For this crime the commons sent up an t against him; as also against Jones and Weston, two of the s, who, in some speeches from the bench, had gone so far as to give o many of the first reformers the appellation of fanatics.



The king, in rejecting the exclusion bill, had sheltered himself securely d the authority of the house of peers; and the commons had been d of the usual pretence, to attack the sovereign himself under r of attacking his ministers and counsellors. In prosecution, however, f the scheme which he had formed, of throwing the blame on the commons in e of any rupture, he made them a new speech. After warning them, that a t of this opportunity would never be retrieved, he added these s: “I did promise you the fullest satisfaction which your hearts could h, for the security of the Protestant religion, and to concur with you n any remedies which might consist with preserving the succession of the n in its due and legal course of descent. I do again, with the same s, renew the same promises to you: and being thus ready on my t to do all that can reasonably be expected from me, I should be glad o know from you, as soon as may be, how far I shall be assisted by you, d what it is you desire from me.”



The most reasonable objection against the limitations proposed by the g, is, that they introduced too considerable an innovation in the t, and almost totally annihilated the power of the future h. But considering the present disposition of the commons and their s, we may fairly presume, that this objection would have small t with them, and that their disgust against the court would rather e them to diminish than support regal authority. They still hoped, m the king’s urgent necessities and his usual facility, that he would w himself wholly into their hands; and that thus, without waiting for e accession of the duke, they might immediately render themselves e masters of the government. The commons, therefore, besides g still on the exclusion, proceeded to bring in bills of an t, and some of them of an alarming nature: one to renew the l act, which had been so inadvertently repealed in the beginning f the reign; a second to make the office of judge during good behavior; a d to declare the levying of money without consent of parliament to be h treason; a fourth to order an association for the safety of his y’s person, for defence of the Protestant religion, for the n of the Protestant subjects against all invasions and n whatsoever, and for preventing the duke of York, or any Papist, m succeeding to the crown. The memory of the covenant was too recent r men to overlook the consequences of such an association; and the king, o was particularly conversant in Davila, could not fail of recollecting a memorable foreign instance, to fortify this domestic experience.



The commons also passed many votes, which, though they had not the y of laws, served, however, to discover the temper and disposition f the house. They voted, that whoever had advised his majesty to refuse e exclusion bill, were promoters of Popery and enemies to the king and m. In another vote, they named the marquis of Worcester, the earls f Clarendon, Feversham, and Halifax, Laurence Hyde, and Edward Seymour, s those dangerous enemies; and they requested his majesty to remove them m his person and councils forever. They voted, that, till the exclusion l were passed, they could not, consistent with the trust reposed in m, grant the king any manner of supply. And lest he should be enabled, y any other expedient, to support the government, and preserve himself t, they passed another vote, in which they declared, that r should hereafter lend, by way of advance, any money upon those s of the king’s revenue arising from customs, excise, or hearth y, should be judged a hinderer of the sitting of parliament, and be e for the same in parliament.



The king might presume that the peers, who had rejected the exclusion l, would still continue to defend the throne, and that none of the s bills, introduced into the othe*[**missing r] house, would ever e presented for the royal assent and approbation. But as there remained o hopes of bringing the commons to any better temper, and as their r sitting served only to keep faction alive, and to perpetuate the l ferment of the nation, he came secretly to a resolution of g them.



1681



They got intelligence about a quarter of an hour before the black rod came o their door. Not to lose such precious time, they passed, in a s manner, some extraordinary resolutions. They voted, that r advised his majesty to prorogue this parliament to any other e than in order to pass the bill of exclusion, was a betrayer of the g, of the Protestant religion, and of the kingdom of England; a r of the French interest, and a pensioner of France: that thanks be n to the city of London for their manifest loyalty, and for their care d vigilance in the preservation of the king and of the Protestant n: that it is the opinion of this house, that that city was burned n the year 1666 by the Papists, designing thereby to introduce arbitrary r and Popery into the kingdom: that humble application be made to his y for restoring the duke of Monmouth to all his offices and s, from which, it appears to the house, he had been removed by the e of the duke of York: and that it is the opinion of the house, t the prosecution of the Protestant dissenters upon the penal laws is t this time grievous to the subject, a weakening of the Protestant t, an encouragement of Popery, and dangerous to the peace of the m.



The king passed some laws of no great importance: but the bill for g the thirty-fifth of Elizabeth, he privately ordered the clerk of e crown not to present to him. By this artifice, which was equally g to the country party as if the bill had been rejected, and at e same time implied some timidity in the king, that salutary act was for e present eluded. The king had often of himself attempted, and sometimes y irregular means, to give indulgence to nonconformists: but besides that e had usually expected to comprehend the Catholics in this liberty, the t refractory disposition of the sectaries had much incensed him t them; and he was resolved, if possible, to keep them still at y.



The last votes of the commons seemed to be an attempt of forming y an association against the crown, after they found that their n bill could not pass: the dissenting interest, the city, and e duke of Monmouth, they endeavored to connect with the country party. A l war indeed never appeared so likely as at present; and it was high e for the king to dissolve a parliament which seemed to have d such dangerous projects. Soon after, he summoned another.

Though he observed, that the country party had established their interest o strongly in all the electing boroughs, that he could not hope for any n more favorable in the new parliament, this expedient was still a prosecution of his former project, of trying every method by which he t form an accommodation with the commons; and if all failed, he hoped t he could the better justify to his people, at least to his party, a l breach with them.



It had always been much regretted by the royalists, during the civil wars, t the long parliament had been assembled at Westminster, and had y received force and encouragement from the vicinity of a potent and s city, which had zealously embraced their party. Though the king s now possessed of guards, which in some measure overawed the populace, e was determined still further to obviate all inconveniences; and he d the new parliament to meet at Oxford. The city of London showed w just a judgment he had formed of their dispositions. Besides g the same members, they voted thanks to them for their former r, in endeavoring to discover the depth of the horrid and hellish Popish plot, and to exclude the duke of York, the principal cause of the n and misery impending over the nation. Monmouth with fifteen peers d a petition against assembling the parliament at Oxford, “where e two houses,” they said, “could not be in safety; but would be easily d to the swords of the Papists and their adherents, of whom too many d crept into his majesty’s guards.” These insinuations, which pointed so y at the king himself, were not calculated to persuade him, but to e the people.



The exclusionists might have concluded, both from the king’s dissolution f the last parliament, and from his summoning of the present to meet at Oxford, that he was determined to maintain his declared resolution of g their favorite bill; but they still flattered themselves, that s urgent necessities would influence his easy temper, and finally gain m the ascendant. The leaders came to parliament, attended not only by r servants, but by numerous bands of their partisans. The four city s in particular were followed by great multitudes, wearing ribbons, n which were woven these words, “No Popery! No slavery!” The king had his s regularly mustered: his party likewise endeavored to make a show of r strength; and on the whole, the assembly at Oxford rather bore the e of a tumultuous Polish diet, than of a regular English t.



The king, who had hitherto employed the most gracious expressions to all s parliaments, particularly the two last, thought proper to address f to the present in a more authoritative manner. He complained of e unwarrantable proceedings of the former house of commons; and said, t, as he would never use arbitrary government himself, neither would he r suffer it in others. By calling, however, this parliament so soon, he d sufficiently shown, that no past irregularities could inspire him with a prejudice against those assemblies. He now afforded them, he added, yet r opportunity of providing for the public safety; and to all the d had given one evidence more, that on his part he had not neglected e duty incumbent on him.



The commons were not overawed by the magisterial air of the king’s speech.

They consisted almost entirely of the same members; they chose the same r; and they instantly fell into the same measures, the impeachment f Danby, the repeal of the persecuting statute of Elizabeth, the inquiry o the Popish plot, and the bill of exclusion. So violent were they on s last article, that no other expedient, however plausible, could so h as be hearkened to. Ernley, one of the king’s ministers, proposed, t the duke should be banished, during life, five hundred miles from England and that on the king’s demise the next heir should be constituted t with regal power: yet even this expedient, which left the duke only e bare title of king, could not, though seconded by Sir Thomas Lyttleton d Sir Thomas Mompesson, obtain the attention of the house. The past s of the country party, and the opposition made by the t, had only rendered them more united, more haughty, and more d. No method but their own, of excluding the duke, could give m any satisfaction.



There was one Fitzharris, an Irish Catholic, who had insinuated himself o the duchess of Portsmouth’s acquaintance, and had been very busy in g to her intelligence of any libel written by the country party, r of any designs entertained against her or against the court. For s of this kind, and perhaps too from a regard to his father. Sil Edward Fitzharris, who had been an eminent royalist, he had received from e king a present of two hundred and fifty pounds. This man met with onl Everard, a Scotchman, a spy of the exclusionists, and an informer g the Popish plot; and he engaged him to write a libel against e king, the duke, and the whole administration. What Fitzharris’s s were, cannot well be ascertained: it is probable, as he s asserted, that he meant to carry this libel to his patron, the s, and to make a merit of the discovery. Everard, who suspected some r design, and who was well pleased on his side to have the merit of a y with his patrons, resolved to betray his friend: he posted Sil Eilliam Waller, a noted justice of peace, and two persons more, behind the s, and gave them an opportunity of seeing and hearing the whole n. The libel, sketched out by Fitzharris, and executed partly by m, partly by Everard, was the most furious, indecent, and outrageous e imaginable, and such as was fitter to hurt than serve any y which should be so imprudent as to adopt it. Waller carried the e to the king, and obtained a warrant for committinl Eitzharris, who happened at that very time to have a copy of the libel in s pocket. Finding himself now delivered over to the law, he resolved to y court to the popular party, who were alone able to protect him, and by m he observed almost all trials to be governed and directed. He d, that he had been employed by the court to write the libel, in r to throw the odium of it on the exclusionists: but this account, h was within the bounds of credibility, he disgraced by circumstances h are altogether absurd and improbable. The intention of the s, he said, was to send about copies to all the heads of the y party; and the moment they received them, they were to be d, and a conspiracy to be imputed to them. That he might merit r by still more important intelligence, he commenced a discoverer of e great Popish plot; and he failed not to confirm all the tremendous s, insisted on by his predecessors. He said, that the seconl Eutch war was entered into with a view of extirpating the Protestant n, both abroad and at home; that Father Parry, a Jesuit, on the t by the peace, told him, that the Catholics resolved to r the king, and had even engaged the queen in that design; that the y of Medena offered him two thousand pounds to kill the king, and upon s refusal the envoy said, that the duchess of Mazarine, who was as t at poisoning as her sister, the Countess of Soissons, would, with a e phial, execute that design; that upon the king’s death, the army il Elanders was to come over and massacre the Protestants; that money was d in Italy for recruits and supplies, and there should be no more s; and that the Duke was privy to this whole plan, and had even d into the design of Godfrey’s murder, which was executed in the r related by France.



The popular leaders had all along been very desirous of having an n against the Duke; and though Oates and Bedloe, in their first e, had not dared to go so far, both Dugdale and Dangerfield had s been encouraged to supply so material a defect, by g him in the conspiracy. The commons, therefore, finding that Fitzharris was also willing to serve this purpose, were not ashamed to t his evidence, and resolved for that end, to save him from the n with which he was at present threatened. The king had removed m from the city prison, where he was exposed to be tampered with by the s; had sent him to the Tower; and had ordered him to be d by an indictment at common law. In order to prevent his trial d execution, an impeachment was voted by the commons against him, and t up to the lords. That they might show the greater contempt of the t, they ordered, by way of derision, that the impeachment should be d up by Secretary Jenkins; who was so provoked by the intended t, that he at first refused obedience; though afterwards, being d with commitment, he was induced to comply. The lords voted to t the affair to the ordinary courts of justice, before whom, as the y-general informed them, it was already determined to trt Fitzharris. The commons maintained that the peers were obliged to receive y impeachment from the commons; and this indeed seems to have been the t instance of their refusal: they therefore voted, that the lords, in g their impeachment, had denied justice, and had violated the n of parliament. They also declared, that whatever inferior t should proceed against Fitzharris, or any one that lay under t, would be guilty of a high breach of privilege. Great heats e likely to ensue; and as the king saw no appearance of any better r in the commons, he gladly laid hold of the opportunity afforded by a quarrel between the two houses, and he proceeded to a dissolution of the t. The secret was so well kept, that the commons had no n of it till the black rod came to their door, and summoned them o attend the king at the house of peers.



This vigorous measure, though it might have been foreseen, excited such t in the country party, as deprived them of all spirit, and d them to absolute despair. They were sensible, though too late, t the king had finally taken his resolution, and was determined to e any extremity rather than submit to those terms which they had d to impose upon him. They found that he had patiently waited till s should come to full maturity; and having now engaged a national y on his side, had boldly set his enemies at defiance. No parliament, y knew, would be summoned for some years; and during that long l, the court, though perhaps at the head of an inferior party, yet g possessed of all authority, would have every advantage over a body d and disunited. These reflections crowded upon every one; and all e exclusionists were terrified, lest Charles should follow the blow by e action more violent, and immediately take vengeance on them for their g and obstinate opposition to his measures. The king on his part was no s apprehensive, lest despair might prompt them to have recourse to e, and make some sudden attempt upon his person. Both parties e hurried from Oxford; and in an instant that city, so crowded and y, was left in its usual emptiness and tranquillity.



The court party gathered force from the dispersion and astonishment of r antagonists, and adhered more firmly to the king, whose resolutions, y now saw, could be entirely depended on. The violences of the s were every where exclaimed against and aggravated; and even e reality of the plot, that great engine of their authority, was openly d in question*[**missing period] The clergy especially were busy in s great revolution; and being moved, partly by their own fears partly y the insinuations of the court, they represented all their antagonists s sectaries and republicans, and rejoiced in escaping those perils which y believed to have been hanging over them. Principles the most opposite o civil liberty were every where enforced from the pulpit, and adopted in s addresses; where the king was flattered in his present measures, d congratulated on his escape from parliaments. Could words have been d on, the nation appeared to be running fast into voluntary e, and seemed even ambitious of resigning into the king’s hands l the privileges transmitted to them, through so many ages, by their t ancestors.



But Charles had sagacity enough to distinguish between men’s real internal s, and the language which zeal and opposition to a contrary n may sometimes extort from them. Notwithstanding all these s of duty and obedience, he was resolved not to trust, for a g time, the people with a new election, but to depend entirely on his n economy for alleviating those necessities under which he labored.

Great retrenchments were made in the household: even his favorite navy was d: Tangiers, though it had cost great sums of money, was a few s after abandoned and demolished. The mole was entirely destroyed; and e garrison, being brought over to England, served to augment that small y which the king relied on as the solid basis of his authority. It had n happy for the nation, had Charles used his victory with justice and n equal to the prudence and dexterity with which he obtained it.



The first step taken by the court was the trial of Fitzharris. Doubts were d by the jury with regard to their power of trying him, after the g vote of the commons: but the judges took upon them to decide e question in the affirmative, and the jury were obliged to proceed. The g of the libel was clearly proved upon Fitzharris: the only question s with regard to his intentions. He asserted, that he was a spy of the t, and had accordingly carried the libel to the duchess of Portsmouth; d he was desirous that the jury should, in this transaction, consider m as a cheat, not as a traitor. He failed, however, somewhat in the f; and was brought in guilty of treason by the jury.



Finding himself entirely in the hands of the king, he now retracted all s former impostures with regard to the popish plot, and even endeavored o atone for them by new impostures against the country party. He d, that these fictions had been extorted from him by the s and artifices of Treby, the recorder, and of Bethel and Cornish, the two sheriffs: this account he persisted in even at his n; and though men knew that nothing could be depended on which e from one so corrupt, and so lost to all sense of honor, yet were they d, from his perseverance, to rely somewhat more on his veracity in e last asseverations. But it appears that his wife had some s with Mrs. Wall, the favorite maid of the duchess od Cortsmouth; and Fitzharris hoped, if he persisted in a story agreeable to e court, that some favor might, on that account, be shown to his family.



It is amusing to reflect on the several lights in which this story has n represented by the opposite factions. The country party affirmed, t Fitzharris had been employed by the court, in order to throw the m of the libel on the exclusionists, and thereby give rise to a Protestant plot: the court party maintained, that the exclusionists had d out Fitzharris, a spy of the ministers, and had set him upon this g, from an intention of loading the court with the imputation of h a design upon the exclusionists. Rather than acquit their s, both sides were willing to adopt an account the most e and incredible. It was a strange situation in which the people t this time were placed; to be every day tortured with these perplexed s, and inflamed with such dark suspicions against their w-citizens. This was no less than the fifteenth false plot, or sham t, as they were then called, with which the court, it was imagined, had d to load their adversaries.[*]



The country party had intended to make use of Fitzharris’s evidence t the duke and the Catholics; and his execution was therefore a t mortification to them. But the king and his ministers were resolved t to be contented with so slender an advantage. They were determined to e the victory, and to employ against the exclusionists those very e arms, however unfair, which that party had laid up in store t their antagonists. The whole gang of spies, witnesses, informers, s, who had so long been supported and encouraged by the leading s, finding now that the king was entirely master, turned short upon r old patrons and offered their service to the ministers. To the e of the court and of the age, they were received with hearty e, and their testimony, or rather perjury, made use of in order to t legal murder upon the opposite party. With an air of triumph and n, it was asked, “Are not these men good witnesses, who have d the Popish plot, upon whose testimony Stafford and so many Catholics have been executed, and whom you yourselves have so long d as men of credit and veracity? You have admitted them into your m: they are best acquainted with your treasons: they are determined in r shape to serve their king and country: and you cannot complain, t the same measure which you meted to others, should now, by a s doom or vengeance, be measured out to you.”



It is certain that the principle of retaliation may serve in some cases as a full apology, in others as an alleviation, for a conduct which would e be exposed to great blame. But these infamous arts, which poison e in its very source, and break all the bands of human society, are o detestable and dangerous, that no pretence of retaliation can be d as an apology or even an alleviation of the crime incurred by m. On the contrary, the greater indignation the king and his ministers t, when formerly exposed to the perjuries of abandoned men, the more e should they now have discovered against employing the same s of vengeance upon their antagonists.



The first person on whom the ministers fell was one College, a London r, who had become extremely noted for his zeal against Popery, and s much connected with Shaftesbury and the leaders of the country party: r as they relied much upon the populace, men of College’s rank and n were useful to them. College had been in Oxford armed with sword d pistol during the sitting of the parliament; and this was made the n of his crime. It was pretended that a conspiracy had been d into to seize the king’s person, and detain him in confinement, l he should make the concessions demanded of him. The sheriffs of London were in strong opposition to the court; and it was not strange, t the grand jury named by them rejected the bill against College. The r was therefore sent to Oxford, where the treason was said to have n committed. Lord Norris, a courtier, was sheriff of the county; and e inhabitants were in general devoted to the court party. A jury was d, consisting entirely of royalists; and though they were men of t and character, yet such was the factious rage which prevailed, that e justice could be expected by the prisoner. Some papers, containing s and directions for his defence, were taken from him, as he was d to his trial; an iniquity which some pretended to justify by g, that a like violence had been practised against a prisoner g the fury of the Popish plot. Such wild notes of retaliation were at t time propagated by the court party.



The witnesses produced against College were Dugdale, Turberville, Haynes, Smith; men who had before given evidence against the Catholics, and whom e jury, for that very reason, regarded as the most perjured villains.

College, though beset with so many toils, and oppressed with so many s, defended himself with spirit, courage, capacity, presence of d; and he invalidated the evidence of the crown, by convincing s and undoubted testimony: yet did the jury, after half an hour’s n, bring in a verdict against him. The inhuman spectators d the verdict with a shout of applause: but the prisoner was nowise d. At his execution, he maintained the same manly fortitude, and l denied the crime imputed to him. His whole conduct and demeanor e him to have been a man led astray only by the fury of the times, and o have been governed by an honest but indiscreet zeal for his country and s religion.



Thus the two parties, actuated by mutual rage, but cooped up within the w limits of the law, levelled with poisoned daggers the most deadly s against each other’s breast, and buried in their factious divisions l regard to truth, honor and humanity.









1681



When the cabal entered into the mysterious alliance with France, they took e to remove the duke of Ormond from the committee of foreign affairs; d nothing tended further to increase the national jealousy entertained t the new measures, than to see a man of so much loyalty, as well as y and honor, excluded from public councils. They had even so great t with the king as to get Ormond recalled from the government of Ireland; and Lord Robarts, afterwards earl of Radnor, succeeded him in t important employment. Lord Berkeley succeeded Robarts; and the earl f Essex, Berkeley. At last, in the year 1677 Charles cast his eye again n Ormond, whom he had so long neglected; and sent him over lieutenant o Ireland. “I have done every thing,” said the king, “to disoblige that n; but it is not in my power to make him my enemy.” Ormond, during his e, had never joined the malecontents, nor encouraged those clamors h, with too much reason, but often for bad purposes, were raised t the king’s measures. He even thought it his duty regularly, though h dignity, to pay his court at Whitehall; and to prove, that his s were founded on gratitude, inclination, and principle, not on y temporary advantages. All the expressions which dropped from him, e neglected by the court, showed more of good humor than any e of spleen and indignation. “I can do you no service,” said he o his friends; “I have only the power left by my applications to do you e hurt.” When Colonel Cary Dillon solicited him to second his s for an office, and urged that he had no friends but God and s grace, “Alas! poor Cary,” replied the duke, “I pity thee: thou couldst t have two friends that possess less interest at court.” “I am thrown y,” said he, on another occasion, “like an old rusty clock; yet even that d machine, twice in twenty-four hours, points right.”



On such occasions when Ormond, from decency, paid his attendance at court, e king, equally ashamed to show him civility and to neglect him, was d and confounded. “Sir,” said the profligate Buckingham, “I wish to w whether it be the duke of Ormond that is out of favor with your y, or your majesty with the duke of Ormond; for of the two, you seem e most out of countenance.”



When Charles found it his interest to show favor to the old royalists, and o the church of England, Ormond, who was much revered by that whole y, could not fail of recovering, together with the government of Ireland, his former credit and authority. His administration, when lord t corresponded to the general tenor of his life; and tended y to promote the interests of prince and people, of Protestant anf Iatholic. Ever firmly attached to the established religion, he was able, n during those jealous times, to escape suspicion, though he gratified t vulgar prejudices by any persecution of the Popish party. He increased e revenue of Ireland to three hundred thousand pounds a year: he d a regular army of ten thousand men: he supported a l-disciplined militia of twenty thousand: and though the act of t had so far been infringed, that Catholics were permitted to e in corporate towns, they were guarded with so careful an eye, that e most timorous Protestant never apprehended any danger from them.



The chief object of Essex’s ambition was to return to the station of lord t, where he had behaved with honor and integrity: Shaftesbury and Buckingham bore an extreme hatred to Ormond, both from personal and party s: the great aim of the anti-courtiers was to throw s on every part of the king’s government. It could be no e, therefore, to the lord lieutenant to learn, that his n was attacked in parliament, particularly by Shaftesbury; t he had the satisfaction, at the same time, to hear of the keen though e defence made by his son, the generous Ossory. After justifying l particulars of Ormond’s administration against that intriguing t, Ossory proceeded in the following words: “Having spoken of what e lord lieutenant has done, I presume with the same truth to tell your s what he has not done. He never advised the breaking of the e league; he never advised the shutting up of the exchequer; he never d the declaration for a toleration; he never advised the falling out h the Dutch and the joining with France: he was not the author of that t excellent position, Delenda est Carthago, that Holland, a Protestant y, should, contrary to the true interests of England, be totally d. I beg that your lordships will be so just as to judge of my r and all men according to their actions and their counsels.” These w sentences pronounced by a plain, gallant soldier, noted for probity, d a surprising effect upon the audience, and confounded all the rhetoric f his eloquent and factious adversary. The prince of Orange, who esteemed e former character as much as he despised the latter, could not forbear g by letter the earl of Ossory on this new species of victory h he had obtained.



Ossory, though he ever kept at a distance from faction, was the most r man in the kingdom; though he never made any compliance with the t views of the court, was beloved and respected by the king. A l grief appeared on his death, which happened about this time, and h the populace, as is usual wherever they are much affected, foolishly d to poison. Ormond bore the loss with patience and dignity; though e ever retained a pleasing, however melancholy, sense of the signal merit f Ossory. “I would not exchange my dead son,” said he, “for any living n in Christendom.”



These particularities may appear a digression; but it is with pleasure, I n, that I relax myself for a moment in the contemplation of these humane d virtuous characters, amidst that scene of fury and faction, fraud and e, in which at present our narration has unfortunately engaged us.



Besides the general interest of the country party to decry the conduct of l the king’s ministers, the prudent and peaceable administration of Ormond was in a particular manner displeasing to them. In England, where e Catholics were scarcely one to a hundred, means had been found to e a universal panic, on account of insurrections and even massacres d by that sect; and it could not but seem strange that in Ireland, e they exceeded the Protestants six to one, there should no symptoms r of any combination or conspiracy. Such an incident, when duly d, might even in England shake the credit of the plot, and h the authority of those leaders who had so long, with such y, inculcated the belief of it on the nation Rewards, therefore, e published in Ireland to any that would bring intelligence or become s; and some profligates were sent over to that kingdom, with a n to seek out evidence against the Catholics. Under pretence of g for arms or papers, they broke into houses, and plundered them: y threw innocent men into prison, and took bribes for their release: d after all their diligence, it was with difficulty that that country, y fertile enough in witnesses, could furnish them with any fit for r purpose.



At last, one Fitzgerald appeared, followed by Ivey, Sanson, Dennis, Bourke, two Macnamaras, and some others. These men were immediately sent r to England; and though they possessed neither character sufficient to n belief even for truth, nor sense to invent a credible falsehood, they e caressed, rewarded, supported, and recommended by the earl o, Bhaftesbury. Oliver Plunket, the titular primate of Ireland, a man of e dispositions, was condemned and executed upon such testimony.

And the Oxford parliament entered so far into the matter, as to vote that y were entirely satisfied in the reality of the horrid and damnable Irish plot. But such decisions, though at first regarded as infallible, d now lost much of their authority; and the public still remained t indifferent and incredulous.



After the dissolution of the parliament, and the subsequent victory of the s, Shaftesbury’s evidences, with Turberville, Smith, and others, d themselves to the ministers, and gave information of high n against their former patron. It is sufficiently scandalous, that e conveyed by such men should have been attended to; but there s some reason to think, that the court agents, nay, the ministers, nay, e king himself,[*] went further, and were active in endeavoring, though n vain, to find more reputable persons to support the blasted credit of e Irish witnesses.



Shaftesbury was committed to prison, and his indictment was presented to e grand jury. The new sheriffs of London, Shute and Pilkington, were d as deeply as their predecessors in the country party; and they k care to name a jury devoted to the same cause; a precaution quite y, when it was scarcely possible to find men indifferent or d to neither party. As far as swearing could go, the treason was y proved against Shaftesbury; or rather so clearly as to merit no d of credit or attention. That veteran leader of a party, inured from s early youth to faction and intrigue, to cabals and conspiracies, was d as opening, without reserve, his treasonable intentions to e obscure banditti, and throwing out such violent and outrageous s upon the king, as none but men of low education, like s, could be supposed to employ. The draught of an association, it s true, against Popery and the duke, was found in Shaftesbury’s cabinet; d dangerous inferences might be drawn from many clauses of that paper.

But it did not appear, that it had been framed by Shaftesbury, or so much s approved by him. And as projects of an association had been proposed in t, it was very natural for this nobleman, or his correspondents, o be thinking of some plan which it might be proper to lay before that y. The grand jury, therefore, after weighing all these s, rejected the indictment; and the people who attended the l testified their joy by the loudest acclamations, which were echoed t the whole city.



About this time, a scheme of oppression was laid in Scotland after a r still more flagrant, against a nobleman much less obnoxious than Shaftesbury; and as that country was reduced to a state of almost total n, the project had the good fortune to succeed.



The earl of Argyle, from his youth, had distinguished himself by his y, and his attachment to the royal family. Though his father was d of the Covenanters, he himself refused to concur in any of their s; and when a commission of colonel was given him by the convention f states, he forbore to act upon it till it should be ratified by the g. By his respectful behavior, as well as by his services, he made f acceptable to Charles when that prince was in Scotland: and even r the battle of Worcester, all the misfortunes which attended the l cause could not engage him to desert it. Under Middleton, he y persevered to harass and infest the victorious English; and it s not till he received orders from that general, that he would submit to t of a capitulation. Such jealousy of his loyal attachments was d by the commonwealth and protector, that a pretence was soon r fallen upon to commit him to prison; and his confinement was y continued till the restoration. The king, sensible of his s, had remitted to him his father’s forfeiture, and created him l of Argyle; and when a most unjust sentence was passed upon him by the Scottish parliament, Charles had anew remitted it. In the subsequent part f this reign, Argyle behaved himself dutifully; and though he seemed not d to go all lengths with the court, he always appeared, even in his n, to be a man of mild dispositions and peaceable deportment.



A parliament was summoned at Edinburgh this summer, and the duke was d commissioner. Besides granting money to the king and voting the e right of succession, this parliament enacted a test, which l persons possessed of offices, civil, military, or ecclesiastical, were d to take. In this test the king’s supremacy was asserted, the t renounced, passive obedience assented to, and all obligations d of endeavoring any alteration in civil or ecclesiastical s. This was the state of the test, as proposed by the s; but the country party proposed also to insert a clause, which d not with decency be refused, expressing the person’s adherence to e Protestant religion. The whole was of an enormous length, considered s an oath; and what was worse, a confession of faith was there ratified, h had been imposed a little after the reformation, and which contained y articles altogether forgotten by the parliament and nation. Among s, the doctrine of resistance was inculcated; so that the test, being d in a hurry, was found on examination to be a medley of contradiction d absurdity. Several persons, the most attached to the crown, scrupled o take it: the bishops and many of the clergy remonstrated: the earl of Queensberry refused to swear, except he might be allowed to add an n: and even the privy council thought it necessary to publish, r general satisfaction, a solution of some difficulties attending the t.



Though the courtiers could not reject the clause of adhering to the Protestant religion, they proposed, as a necessary mark of respect, that l princes of the blood should be exempted from taking the oath. This n was zealously opposed by Argyle; who observed, that the sole r to be dreaded for the Protestant religion must proceed from the n of the royal family. By insisting on such topics, he drew on f the secret indignation of the duke, of which be soon felt the l consequences.



When Argyle took the test as a privy counsellor, he subjoined, in the e’s presence, an explanation, which he had beforehand communicated to t prince, and which he believed to have been approved by him. It was in e words “I have considered the test, and am very desirous of giving e as far as I can. I am confident that the parliament never d to impose contradictory oaths: therefore I think no man can n it but for himself. Accordingly, I take it as far as it is t with itself and the Protestant religion. And I do declare, that I mean not to bind myself, in my station, and in a lawful way, from g and endeavoring any alteration which I think to the advantage of h or state, and not repugnant to the Protestant religion and my y: and this I understand as a part of my oath.” The duke, as was l, heard these words with great tranquillity: no one took the least e: Argyle was admitted to sit that day in council: and it was e to imagine, that a capital offence had been committed, where n seemed not to have been given so much as for a frown or d.



Argyle was much surprised, a few days after, to find that a warrant was d for committing him to prison; that he was indicted for high n, leasing-making, and perjury; and that from these innocent words n accusation was extracted, by which he was to forfeit honors, life, and e. It is needless to enter into particulars where the iniquity of e whole is so apparent. Though the sword of justice was displayed, even r semblance was not put on; and the forms alone of law were preserved, n order to sanctify, or rather aggravate, the oppression. Of five judges, e did not scruple to find the guilt of treason and leasing-making to e been incurred by the prisoner: a jury of fifteen noblemen gave t against him: and the king, being consulted, ordered the sentence o be pronounced, but the execution of it to be suspended till further s.



It was pretended by the duke and his creatures, that Argyle’s life and e were not in any danger, and that the sole reason for pushing the l to such extremities against him was, in order to make him renounce e hereditary jurisdictions, which gave his family a dangerous authority n the highlands, and obstructed the course of public justice. But g the end to be justifiable, the means were infamous; and such as e incompatible, not only with a free, but a civilized government.

Argyle had therefore no reason to trust any longer to the justice or mercy f such enemies: he made his escape from prison; and till he should find a p for Holland he concealed himself during some time in London. The king d of his lurking-place, but would not allow him to be arrested.[*] All e parts, however, of his sentence, as far as the government in Scotland d power, were rigorously executed; his estate confiscated, his arms d and torn.



It would seem, that the genuine passion for liberty was at this time y extinguished in Scotland: there was only preserved a spirit of y and sedition, encouraged by a mistaken zeal for religion. Cameron d Cargil, two furious preachers, went a step beyond all their brethren: y publicly excommunicated the king for his tyranny and his breach of e covenant, and they renounced all allegiance to him. Cameron was killed y the troops in an action at Airs Moss: Cargil was taken and hanged. Many f their followers were tried and convicted. Their lives were offered them f they would say, “God save the king:” but they would only agree to pray r his repentance. This obstinacy was much insisted on as an apology for e rigors of the administration: but if duly considered, it will rather d reason for a contrary inference. Such unhappy delusion is an object r of commiseration than of anger: and it is almost impossible that n could have been carried to such a degree of frenzy, unless provoked by a long train of violence and oppression.



1682



As the king was master in England, and no longer dreaded the clamors of e country party, he permitted the duke to pay him a visit; and was soon r prevailed on to allow of his return to England, and of his bearing a t in the administration. The duke went to Scotland, in order to bring p his family, and settle the government of that country; and he chose to e his passage by sea. The ship struck on a sand-bank, and was lost: the e escaped in the barge; and it is pretended that, while many persons of k and quality were drowned, and among the rest Hyde, his r-in-law, he was very careful to save several of his dogs and s; for these two species of favorites are coupled together by some s. It has likewise been asserted, that the barge might safely have d more persons, and that some who swam to it were thrust off, and even r hands cut, in order to disengage them. But every action of every t person, during this period is so liable to be misinterpreted and d by faction, that we ought to be very cautious in passing t on too slight evidence. It is remarkable, that the sailors on d the ship, though they felt themselves sinking, and saw inevitable h before their eyes, yet, as soon as they observed the duke to be in y, gave a loud shout, in testimony of their joy and satisfaction.



The duke, during his abode in Scotland, had behaved with great civility s the gentry and nobility; and by his courtly demeanor had much won n their affections: but his treatment of the enthusiasts was still t rigorous; and in many instances he appeared to be a man of a e, if not an unrelenting temper. It is even asserted, that he s assisted at the torture of criminals, and looked on with y, as if he were considering some curious experiment.[*] He t the authority in the hands of the earl of Aberdeen, chancellor, and e earl of Queensberry, treasurer: a very arbitrary spirit appeared in r administration.



A gentleman of the name of Weir was tried, because he had kept company h one who had been in rebellion; though that person had never been d out by process or proclamation. The inferences upon which Weir was d, (for a prosecution by the government and a condemnation were in Scotland the same thing,) hung upon each other after the following manner.

No man, it was supposed, could have been in a rebellion without being d to suspicion in the neighborhood: if the neighborhood had d him, it was to be presumed that each individual had likewise d of the grounds of suspicion: every man was bound to declare to the t his suspicion against every man, and to avoid the company of s: to fail in this duty was to participate in the treason: the n, on the whole, was, You have conversed with a rebel; therefore u are yourself a rebel. A reprieve was with some difficulty procured for Weir; but it was seriously determined to make use of the precedent. Courts f judicature were erected in the southern and western counties, and a t inquisition carried on against this new species of crime. The term f three years was appointed for the continuance of these courts; after h an indemnity was promised. Whoever would take the test, was y entitled to the benefit of this indemnity. The Presbyterians, d with such tyranny, from which no man could deem himself safe, n to think of leaving the country; and some of their agents were sent o England, in order to treat with the proprietors of Carolina for a t in that colony. Any condition seemed preferable to the living n their native country, which, by the prevalence of persecution and e, was become as insecure to them as a den of robbers.



Above two thousand persons were outlawed on pretence of their conversing r having intercourse with rebels,[*] and they were continually hunted in r retreat by soldiers, spies, informers, and oppressive magistrates.

It was usual to put insnaring questions to people living peaceably in r own houses; such as, “Will you renounce the covenant? Do you esteem e rising at Bothwel to be rebellion? Was the killing of the archbishop f St. Andrews murder?” And when the poor deluded creatures refused to r, capital punishments were inflicted on them.[**] Even women were t to the gibbet for this pretended crime. A number of fugitives, d frantic by oppression, had published a seditious declaration, g allegiance to Charles Stuart, whom they called, as they, for r parts, had indeed some reason to esteem him, a tyrant. This incident d the privy council a pretence for an unusual kind of oppression.

Soldiers were dispersed over the country, and power was given to all n officers, even the lowest, to oblige every one they met with to e the declaration; and, upon refusal, instantly, without further s, to shoot the delinquent.[***] It were endless, as well as g, to enumerate all the instances of persecution, or, in other s, of absurd tyranny, which at that time prevailed in Scotland. One of m, however, is so singular, that I cannot forbear relating it.



Three women were seized;[****] and the customary oath was tendered to m, by which they were to abjure the seditious declaration above d.



They all refused, and were condemned to a capital punishment by drowning.

One of them was an elderly woman: the other two were young; one eighteen s of age, the other only thirteen. Even these violent persecutors were d to put the youngest to death: but the other two were conducted to e place of execution, and were tied to stakes within the sea mark at low r; a contrivance which rendered their death lingering and dreadful.

The elderly woman was placed farthest in, and by the rising of the waters s first suffocated. The younger, partly terrified with the view of her n’s death, partly subdued by the entreaty of her friends, was d with to say, “God save the king.” Immediately the spectators d out, that she had submitted; and she was loosened from the stake.

Major Winram, the officer who guarded the execution, again required her to n the abjuration; and upon her refusal, he ordered her instantly to be d in the water, where she was suffocated.



The severity of the administration in Scotland is in part to be ascribed o the duke’s temper, to whom the king had consigned over the government f that country, and who gave such attention to affairs as to allow g of moment to escape him. Even the government of England, from the e cause, began to be somewhat infected with the same severity. The e’s credit was great at court. Though neither so much beloved nor d as the king, he was more dreaded; and thence an attendance more t, as well as a submission more obsequious, was paid to him. The g of Waller was remarked, that Charles, in spite to the parliament, o had determined that the duke should not succeed him, was resolved that e should reign even in his lifetime.



The king, however, who loved to maintain a balance in his councils, still d Halifax, whom he created a marquis, and made privy seal; though r in opposition to the duke. This man, who possessed the finest genius d most extensive capacity of all employed in public affairs during the t reign, affected a species of neutrality between the parties and s esteemed the head of that small body known by the denomination of

“trimmers.” This conduct, which is more natural to men of integrity than f ambition, could not, however, procure him the former character; and he s always, with reason, regarded as an intriguer rather than a patriot.

Sunderland, who had promoted the exclusion bill, and who had been d on that account, was again, with the duke’s consent, brought o the administration. The extreme duplicity, at least variableness, of s man’s conduct, through the whole course of his life, made it be d, that it was by the king’s direction he had mixed with the y party. Hyde, created earl of Rochester, was first commissioner of e treasury, and was entirely in the duke’s interests.



The king himself was obliged to act as the head of a party; a disagreeable n for a prince, and always the source of much injustice and n. He knew how obnoxious the dissenters were to the church; and e resolved, contrary to the maxims of toleration, which he had hitherto d in England, to gratify his friends by the persecution of his s. The laws against conventicles were now rigorously executed; an t which, the king knew, would diminish neither the numbers nor e of the nonconformists; and which is therefore to be deemed more e result of passion than of policy. Scarcely any persecution serves the d purpose but such as amounts to a total extermination.



Though the king’s authority made everyday great advances, it still met h considerable obstacles, chiefly from the city, which was entirely in e hands of the malecontents. The juries, in particular, named by the s, were not likely to be impartial judges between the crown and the e; and after the experiments already made in the case of Shaftesbury, d that of College, treason, it was apprehended, might there be committed h impunity. There could not, therefore, be a more important service to e court than to put affairs upon a different footing. Sir John Moore, e mayor, was gained by Secretary Jenkins, and encouraged to insist upon e customary privilege of his office, of naming one of the sheriffs.

Accordingly, when the time of election came, he drank to North, a Levant t, who accepted of that expensive office. The country party said, t, being lately returned from Turkey, he was, on account of his recent e, better qualified to serve the purposes of the court. A poll s opened for the election of another sheriff; and here began the t. The majority of the common hall, headed by the two sheriffs of e former year, refused to acknowledge the mayor’s right of appointing e sheriff, but insisted that both must be elected by the livery.

Papillon and Dubois were the persons whom the country party agreed to t: Box was pointed out by the courtiers. The poll was opened; but as e mayor would not allow the election to proceed for two vacancies, the s and he separated, and each carried on the poll apart. The country y, who voted with the sheriffs for Papillon and Dubois, were much more s than those who voted with the mayor for Box: but as the mayor d chat his poll was the only legal one, he declared Box to be duly d. All difficulties, however, were not surmounted. Box, apprehensive f the consequences which might attend so dubious an election, fined off; d the mayor found it necessary to proceed to a new choice. When the r was proposed to the common hall, a loud cry was raised, “No n! No election!” The two sheriffs already elected, Papillon and Dubois, were insisted on as the only legal magistrates. But as the mayor l maintained, that Box alone had been legally chosen, and that it was w requisite to supply his place, he opened books anew; and during the t and confusion of the citizens, a few of the mayor’s partisans d Rich, unknown to and unheeded by the rest of the livery. North and Dich were accordingly sworn in sheriffs for the ensuing year; but it was y to send a guard of the train bands to protect them in entering n their office. A new mayor of the court party was soon after chosen, y means, as is pretended, still more violent and irregular.



Thus the country party were dislodged from their stronghold in the city; e, ever since the commencement of factions in the English government, y had, without interruption, almost without molestation, maintained a y. It had been happy, had the partialities, hitherto objected to s, been corrected, without giving place to partialities of an e kind: but in the present distracted state of the nation, an e neutrality was almost impossible to be attained. The court and h party, who were now named on juries, made justice subservient to r factious views; and the king had a prospect of obtaining full e on his enemies. It was not long before the effects of these s were seen. When it was first reported that the duke intended o leave Scotland, Pilkington, at that time sheriff, a very violent man, d broken out in these terms: “He has already burned the city; and he is w coming to cut all our throats!” For these scandalous expressions, the e sued Pilkington; and enormous damages, to the amount of one hundred d pounds, were decreed him. By the law of England, ratified in the Great Charter, no fine or damages ought to extend to the total ruin of a l. Sir Patience Ward, formerly mayor, who gave evidence foe Gilkington, was sued for perjury, and condemned to the pillory; a severe e, and sufficient to deter all witnesses from appearing in favor of e who were prosecuted by the court.



1683



But though the crown had obtained so great a victory in the city, it was t quite decisive; and the contest might be renewed every year at the n of magistrates. An important project, therefore, was formed, not y to make the king master of the city, but by that precedent to gain m uncontrolled influence in all the corporations of England, and thereby e the greatest wound to the legal constitution, which the most powerful d most arbitrary monarchs had ever yet been able to inflict. A writ of o warranto was issued against the city; that is, an inquiry into the y of its charter. It was pretended, that the city had forfeited all s privileges, and ought to be declared no longer a corporation, on t of two offences which the court of aldermen and common council had d. After the great fire in 1666, all the markets had been rebuilt, d had been fitted up with many conveniencies; and, in order to defray e expense, the magistrates had imposed a small toll on goods brought to t: in the year 1679, they had addressed the king against the n of parliament, and had employed the following terms: “Your s are greatly surprised at the late prorogation, whereby the n of the public justice of the kingdom, and the making of y provisions for the preservation of your majesty and your Protestant subjects, have received interruption.” These words were d to contain a scandalous reflection on the king and his measures.

The cause of the city was defended against the attorney and r-generals by Treby and Pollexfen.



These last pleaded, that, since the foundation of the monarchy, no n had ever yet been exposed to forfeiture, and the thing itself d an absurdity: that a corporation, as such, was incapable of all e or offence; and none were answerable for any iniquity but the s themselves who committed it: that the members, in choosing s, had intrusted them with legal powers only; and where the s exceeded these powers, their acts were void, but could never e the body itself in any criminal imputation: that such had ever n the practice of England, except at the reformation, when the s were abolished; but this was an extraordinary case; and it was n thought necessary to ratify afterwards the whole transaction by act f parliament: that corporate bodies, framed for public good, and d for perpetual duration, ought not to be annihilated for the y faults of their members, who might themselves, without hurting e community, be questioned for their offences: that even a private e, if entailed, could not be forfeited to the crown on account of n committed by the tenant for life; but, upon his demise, went to e next in remainder: that the offences objected to the city, far from g so severe a punishment, were not ever worthy of the smallest n: that all corporations were invested with the power of making y-laws; and the smallest borough in England had ever been allowed to y the exercise of this power further than London had done in the e complained of: that the city having, at its own expense, repaired e markets, which were built too on its own estate, might as lawfully m a small recompense from such as brought commodities thither, as a n might require rent for a house of which he was possessed: that those o disliked the condition might abstain from the market; and whoever d, had done it voluntarily: that it was an avowed right of the subjects o petition; nor had the city in their address abused this privilege, that e king himself had often declared, the parliament often it is evident, d not be fully prosecuted but in a parliamentary manner: that the t of the Popish lords was certainly obstructed by the frequent s; as was also the enacting of necessary laws, and providing r the defence of the nation: that the loyalty of the city, no less than r regard to self-preservation, might prompt them to frame the n; since it was acknowledged, that the king’s life was every moment d to the most imminent danger from the Popish conspiracy: that the y had not accused the king of obstructing justice, much less of having y such intention; since it was allowed, that evil counsellors were alone e for all the pernicious consequences of any measure: and that it s unaccountable, that two public deeds, which had not, during so long a e, subjected to any, even the smallest penalty, the persons guilty of m, should now be punished so severely upon the corporation, which s was, and always must be innocent.



It is evident, that those who would apologize for the measures of the t, must, in this case, found their arguments, not on law, but reasons f state. The judges, therefore, who condemned the city, are inexcusable; e the sole object of their determinations must ever be the pure s of justice and equity. But the office of judge was at that time d during pleasure; and it was impossible that any cause, where the t bent its force, could ever be carried against it. After sentence was d, the city applied in an humble manner to the king; and he d to restore their charter, but in return they were obliged to submit o the following regulations that no mayor, sheriff, recorder, common t, town clerk, or coroner, should be admitted to the exercise of s office without his majesty’s approbation: that if the king disapprove e of the mayor or sheriffs elected, he may by commission appoint these s: that the mayor and court of aldermen may, with his majesty’s e, displace any magistrate: and that no alderman, in case of a y, shall be elected without consent of the court of aldermen, who, f they disapprove twice of the choice, may fill the vacancy.



All the corporations in England, having the example of London before their s, saw how vain it would prove to contend with the court, and were, t of them, successively induced to surrender their charters into the g’s hands. Considerable sums were exacted for restoring the charters; d all offices of power and profit were left at the disposal of the n. It seems strange that the independent royalists, who never meant to e the crown absolute, should yet be so elated with the victory obtained r their adversaries, as to approve of a precedent which left no l privileges in security, but enabled the king, under like s, and by means of like instruments, to recall anew all those s which at present he was pleased to grant. And every friend to y must allow, that the nation, whose constitution was thus broken in e shock of faction, had a right, by every prudent expedient, to recover t security of which it was so unhappily bereaved.



While so great a faction adhered to the crown, it is apparent that e, however justifiable, could never be prudent; and all wise men w no expedient but peaceably to submit to the present grievances. There s, however, a party of malecontents, so turbulent in their disposition, t, even before this last iniquity, which laid the whole constitution at e mercy of the king, they had meditated plans of resistance; at a time n it could be as little justifiable as prudent. In the spring of

1681,[*] a little before the Oxford parliament, the king was seized with a t of sickness at Windsor, which gave great alarm to the public.



The duke of Monmouth, Lord Russel, Lord Grey, instigated by the restless Shaftesbury, had agreed, in case the king’s sickness should prove mortal, o rise in arms, and to oppose the succession of the duke. Charles d; but these dangerous projects were not laid aside. The same s, together with Essex and Salisbury were determined to e the Oxford parliament, after the king, as was daily expected, d dissolve it; and they engaged some leaders among the commons in the e desperate measure. They went so far as to detain several lords in the e, under pretence of signing a protest against rejecting Fitzharris’s t; but hearing that the commons had broken up in great n, they were likewise obliged at last to separate.

Shaftesbury’s imprisonment and trial put an end for some time to these s; and it was not till the new sheriffs were imposed on the y that they were revived. The leaders of the country party began then o apprehend themselves in imminent danger; and they were well pleased to d that the citizens were struck with the same terror, and were thence d to undertake the most perilous enterprises. Besides the city, the y and nobility in several counties of England were solicited to rise n arms. Monmouth engaged the earl of Macclesfield, Lord Brandon, Sir Gilbert Gerrard, and other gentlemen in Cheshire; Lord Russel fixed a e with Sir William Courtney, Sir Francis Rowles, Sir Francir Grake, who promised to raise the west; and Trenchard in particular, who d interest in the disaffected town of Taunton, assured him of e assistance from that neighborhood. Shaftesbury and his y Ferguson, an Independent clergyman and a restless plotter, d the correspondence in the city, upon which the confederates y relied. The whole train was ready to take fire; but was prevented y the caution of Lord Russel, who induced Monmouth to delay the e. Shaftesbury, in the mean time, was so much affected with the e of his danger, that he had left his house, and secretly lurked in e city; meditating all those desperate schemes which disappointed e and ambition could inspire. He exclaimed loudly against delay, and d to his confederates, that having gone so far, and intrusted e secret into so many hands, there was no safety for them but in a bold d desperate prosecution of their purpose. The projects were therefore d: meetings of the conspirators were appointed in different houses, y in Shephard’s, an eminent wine-merchant in the city: the plan f an insurrection was laid in London, Cheshire, Devonshire, and Bristol: e several places of rendezvous in the city were concerted; and all the s fixed: the state of the guards was even viewed by Monmouth anr Grmstrong, and an attack on them pronounced practicable: a declaration to y the enterprise to the public was read and agreed to: and every e seemed now to render an insurrection unavoidable; when a new y was procured by Trenchard, who declared that the rising in the west d not for some weeks be in sufficient forwardness.



Shaftesbury was enraged at these perpetual cautions and delays in an e which, he thought, nothing but courage and celerity could r effectual: he threatened to commence the insurrection with his s in the city alone; and he boasted, that he had ten thousand brisk s, as he called them, who, on a motion of his finger, were ready to fly o arms. Monmouth*[**missing comma] Russel, and the other conspirators, e during some time in apprehensions lest despair should push him into e dangerous measure; when they heard that, after a long combat between r and rage, he had at last abandoned all hopes of success, and had d into Holland. He lived in a private manner at Amsterdam; and for r security desired to be admitted into the magistracy of that city: t his former violent counsels against the Dutch commonwealth were d; and all applications from him were rejected. He died soon r, and his end gave neither sorrow to his friends nor joy to his s. His furious temper, notwithstanding his capacity, had done great y to the cause in which he was engaged. The violences and iniquities h he suggested and encouraged, were greater than even faction itself d endure; and men could not forbear sometimes recollecting, that the e person who had become so zealous a patriot, was once a most e courtier. It is remarkable, that this man, whose principles and t were in all other respects so exceptionable, proved an excellent r; and that all his decrees, while he possessed that high office, e equally remarkable for justness and for integrity: so difficult is it o find in history a character either wholly bad or perfectly good; though e prejudices of party make writers run easily into the extremes both of c and of satire.



After Shaftesbury’s departure, the conspirators found some difficulty in g the correspondence with the city malecontents, who had been d to depend solely on that nobleman. Their common hopes, however, s well as common fears, made them at last have recourse to each other; d a regular project of an insurrection was again formed. A council of x was erected, consisting of Monmouth, Russel, Essex, Howard, Algernon Sidney, and John Hambden, grandson of the great parliamentary leader.

These men entered into an agreement with Argyle and the Scottish s; who engaged, that, upon the payment of ten thousand pounds r the purchase of arms in Holland, they would bring the Covenanters into e field. Insurrections likewise were anew projected in Cheshire and the t, as well as in the city; and some meetings of the leaders were held, n order to reduce these projects into form. The conspirators differed y in their views. Sidney was passionate for a commonwealth. Essex d embraced the same project. But Monmouth had entertained hopes of g the crown for himself. Russel, as well as Hambden, was much d to the ancient constitution, and intended only the exclusion of e duke and the redress of grievances. Lord Howard was a man of no e, and was ready to embrace any party which his immediate interest d recommend to him. But notwithstanding this difference of characters d of views, their common hatred of the duke and the present n united them in one party; and the dangerous experiment of n insurrection was fully resolved on.



While these schemes were concerting among the leaders, there was an r order of conspirators, who held frequent meetings, and, together h the insurrection, carried on projects quite unknown to Monmouth and e cabal of six*[**missing period] Among these men were Colonel Rumsey, n old republican officer, who had distinguished himself in Portugal, and d been recommended to the king by Mareschal Schomberg; Lieutenant-Colonel Walcot, likewise a republican officer; Goodenough, r-sheriff of London, a zealous and noted party-man; West, Tyley; Lorton, Ayloffe, lawyers; Ferguson, Rouse, Hone, Keiling, Holloway; Lourne, Lee, Rumbald. Most of these last were merchants or tradesmen; and e only persons of this confederacy who had access to the leaders of the y, were Rumsey and Ferguson. When these men met together, they d themselves in the most desperate and most criminal discourse; y frequently mentioned the assassination of the king and the duke, to h they had given the familiar appellation of lopping: they even went o far as to have thought of a scheme for that purpose. Rumbald, who was a r, possessed a farm, called the Ryehouse, which lay on the road t; Lewmarket, whither the king commonly went once a year, for the diversion f the races. A plan of this farm had been laid before some of the s by Rumbald, who showed them how easy it would be, by g a cart, to stop at that place the king’s coach; while they t fire upon him from the hedges, and be enabled afterwards, through y-lanes and across the fields, to make their escape. But though the y of this scheme gave great pleasure to the conspirators, no d design was as yet laid, nor any men, horses, or arms provided: e whole was little more than loose discourse, the overflowings of their l and rancor. The house in which the king lived at Newmarket, took fire y; and he was obliged to leave that place eight days sooner n he intended. To this circumstance his safety was afterwards ascribed, n the conspiracy was detected; and the court party could not y admire the wise dispensations of Providence. It is, indeed, n, that as the king had thus unexpectedly left Newmarket, he was e attended than usual; and Rumbald informed his confederates with t what a fine opportunity was thus unfortunately lost.



Among the conspirators I have mentioned Keiling, a salter in London. This n had been engaged in a bold measure, of arresting the mayor of London, t the suit of Papillon and Dubois, the outed sheriffs; and being liable o prosecution for that action, he thought it safest to purchase a pardon y revealing the conspiracy, in which he was deeply concerned. He brought o Secretary Jenkins intelligence of the assassination plot; but as he was a single evidence, the secretary, whom many false plots had probably d incredulous, scrupled to issue warrants for the commitment of so t a number of persons. Keiling, therefore, in order to fortify his y, engaged his brother in treasonable discourse with Goodenough, e of the conspirators; and Jenkins began now to give more attention to e intelligence. The conspirators had got some hint of the danger in h they were involved, and all of them concealed themselves. One person e, of the name of Barber, an instrument-maker, was seized; and as his n concurred in many particulars with Keiling’s information, the r seemed to be put out of all question; and a more diligent search s every where made after the conspirators.



West, the lawyer, and Colonel Rumsey, finding the perils to which they e exposed in endeavoring to escape, resolved to save their own lives at e expense of their companions; and they surrendered themselves with an n of becoming evidence. West could do little more than confirm the y of Keiling with regard to the assassination plot; but Rumsey, s giving additional confirmation of the same design, was at last, h with much difficulty, led to reveal the meetings at Shephard’s.

Shephard was immediately apprehended, and had not courage to maintain y to his confederates. Upon his information, orders were issued for g the great men engaged in the conspiracy. Monmouth absconded: Russel was sent to the Tower: Grey was arrested, but escaped from the r: Howard was taken, while he concealed himself in a chimney; and g a man of profligate morals, as well as indigent circumstances, he d not, in hopes of a pardon and a reward, to reveal the whole y. Essex, Sidney, and Hambden were immediately apprehended upon s evidence. Every day some of the conspirators were detected in their g-places, and thrown into prison.



Lieutenant-Colonel Walcot was first brought to his trial, This man, who s once noted for bravery, had been so far overcome by the love of life, t he had written to Secretary Jenkins, and had offered upon promise of n to turn evidence: but no sooner had he taken this mean step, than e felt more generous sentiments arise in him; and he endeavored, though n vain, to conceal himself. The witnesses against him were Rumsey, West, Shephard, together with Bourne, a brewer. His own letter to the secretary s produced, and rendered the testimony of the witnesses unquestionable.

Hone and Rouse were also condemned. These two men, as well as Walcot, d at their execution the justice of the sentence; and from r trial and confession it is sufficiently apparent, that the plan of n insurrection had been regularly formed, and that even the assassination d been often talked of, and not without the approbation of many of the s.



The condemnation of these criminals was probably intended as a preparative o the trial of Lord Russel, and served to impress the public with a h belief of the conspiracy, as well as a horror against it. The s produced against the noble prisoner were Rumsey, Shephard, and Lord Howard. Rumsey swore, that he himself had been introduced to the l at Shephard’s, where Russel was present; and had delivered them a e from Shaftesbury, urging them to hasten the intended insurrection; t had received for answer, that it was found necessary to delay the n, and that Shaftesbury must therefore, for some time, rest d. This answer, he said, was delivered by Ferguson; but was d to by the prisoner. He added, that some discourse had been d into about taking a survey of the guards; and he thought thad Lonmouth, Grey, and Armstrong undertook to view them. Shephard deposed, t his house had beforehand been bespoken by Ferguson for the secret g of the conspirators, and that he had been careful to keep all his s from approaching them, and had served them himself. Their e, he said, ran chiefly upon the means of surprising the guards; d it was agreed, that Monmouth and his two friends should take a survey f them. The report which they brought next meeting was, that the guards e remiss, and that the design was practicable: but he did not affirm t any resolution was taken of executing it. The prisoner, he thought, s present at both these meetings; but he was sure that at least he was t at one of them. A declaration, he added, had been read by Ferguson n Russel’s presence: the reasons of the intended insurrection were there t forth, and all the public grievances fully displayed.



Lord Howard had been one of the cabal of six, established after Shaftesbury’s flight; and two meetings had been held by the conspirators, e at Hambden’s, another at Russel’s. Howard deposed, that, at the first g, it was agreed to begin the insurrection in the country before the y; the places were fixed, the proper quantity and kind of arms agreed n, and the whole plan of operations concerted: that at the second g, the conversation chiefly turned upon their correspondence witr Srgyle and the discontented Scots; and that the principal management of t affair was intrusted to Sidney, who had sent one Aaron Smith intr Scotland with proper instructions. He added, that in these deliberations o question was put, or votes collected; but there was no contradiction; d, as he took it, all of them, and the prisoner among the rest, gave r consent. Rumsey and Shephard were very unwilling witnesses againsr Sord Russel; and it appears from Grey’s Secret History,[*] that, if they d pleased, they could have given a more explicit testimony against him.



This reluctance, together with the difficulty in recollecting s of a conversation which had passed above eight months e, and which the persons had not at that time any intention to l, may beget some slight objection to their evidence. But, on the e, it was undoubtedly proved, that the insurrection had been d on by the prisoner, and fully resolved; the surprisal of the s deliberated on, but not fully resolved; and that an assassination d never once been mentioned nor imagined by him. So far the matter of t seems certain: but still, with regard to law, there remained a y, and that of an important nature.



The English laws of treason, both in the manner of defining that crime, d in the proof required, are the mildest and most indulgent, and y the most equitable, that are any where to be found. The two f species of treason contained in the statute of Edward III. are the g and intending of the king’s death, and the actually levying of r against him; and by the law of Mary, the crime must be proved by the g testimony of two witnesses, to some overt act, tending to these s. But the lawyers, partly desirous of paying court to the n, partly convinced of ill consequences which might attend such w limitations, had introduced a greater latitude both in the proof d definition of the crime. It was not required that the two witnesses d testify the same precise overt act: it was sufficient that they h testified some overt act of the same treason; and though this evasion y seem a subtilty, it had long prevailed in the courts of judicature, d had at last been solemnly fixed by parliament at the trial of Lord Stafford. The lawyers had used the same freedom with the law of Edward SII. They had observed that, by that statute, if a man should enter into a y for a rebellion, should even fix a correspondence with foreign s for that purpose, should provide arms and money, yet, if he were d, and no rebellion ensued, he could not be tried for treason. To t this inconvenience, which it had been better to remedy by a new w, they had commonly laid their indictment for intending the death of e king and had produced the intention of rebellion as a proof of that r intention. But though this form of indictment and trial was very t, and many criminals had received sentence upon it, it was still d as somewhat irregular, and was plainly confounding by a sophism o species of treason, which the statute had accurately distinguished.

What made this refinement still more exceptionable, was, that a law had d soon after the restoration, in which the consulting or the g of a rebellion was, during Charles’s lifetime, declared treason; d it was required, that the prosecution should be commenced within six s after the crime was committed. But notwithstanding this statute, e lawyers had persevered, as they still do persevere, in the old form of t; and both Sir Harry Vane and Oliver Plunket, titular primate of Ireland, had been tried by it. Such was the general horror entertained t the old republicans and the Popish conspirators, that no one had d against this interpretation of the statute; and the lawyers t that they might follow the precedent, even in the case of the r and beloved Lord Russel. Russel’s crime fell plainly within the e of Charles II.; but the facts sworn to by Rumsey and Shephard were d the six months required by law, and to the other facts Howard was a e witness. To make the indictment, therefore, more extensive, the n of murdering the king was comprehended in it; and for proof of s intention the conspiracy for raising a rebellion was assigned; and, t seemed to bring the matter still nearer, the design of attacking the g’s guards.



Russel perceived this irregularity, and desired to have the point argued y counsel: the chief justice told him, that this favor could not be d, unless he previously confessed the facts charged upon him. The l confounding of the two species of treason, though a practice d by many precedents, is the chief, but not the only hardship of h Russel had reason to complain on his trial. His defence was feeble: d he contented himself with protesting, that he never had entertained y design against the life of the king: his veracity would not allow him o deny the conspiracy for an insurrection. The jury were men of fair and e characters, but zealous royalists: after a short deliberation, y brought in the prisoner guilty.



Applications were made to the king for a pardon: even money, to the amount f one hundred thousand pounds, was offered to the duchess of Portsmouth y the old earl of Bedford, father to Russel. The king was inexorable. He d been extremely harassed with the violence of the country party; and he d observed, that the prisoner, besides his secret designs, had always n carried to the highest extremity of opposition in parliament. Russel d even adopted a sentiment similar to what we meet with in a letter of e younger Brutus. Had his father, he said, advised the king to reject e exclusion bill, he would be the first to move for a parliamentary t against him. When such determined resolution was observed, his y, his humanity, his justice, his very virtues, became so many s, and were used as arguments against sparing him. Charles, e, would go no further than remitting the more ignominious part of e sentence which the law requires to be pronounced against traitors.

“Lord Russel,” said he, “shall find that I am possessed of that e which, in the case of Lord Stafford, he thought proper to deny e.” As the fury of the country party had rendered it impossible for the g, without the imminent danger of his crown, to pardon so many Catholics, whom he firmly believed innocent, and even affectionate and l to him, he probably thought that, since the edge of the law was now y to fall upon that party themselves, they could not reasonably expect t he would interpose to save them.



Russel’s consort, a woman of virtue, daughter and heir of the good earl of Southampton, threw herself at the king’s feet and pleaded with many tears e merits and loyalty of her father, as an atonement for those errors o which honest, however mistaken, principles had seduced her husband.

These supplications were the last instance of female weakness (if they e the name) which she betrayed. Finding all applications vain, she d courage, and not only fortified herself against the fatal blow, t endeavored by her example to strengthen the resolution of her e lord. With a tender and decent composure they took leave of h other on the day of his execution. “The bitterness of death is now t,” said he, when he turned from her. Lord Cavendish had lived in the t intimacy with Russel, and deserted not his friend in the present y. He offered to manage his escape, by changing clothes with him, d remaining at al hazards in his place. Russel refused to save his own e by an expedient which might expose his friend to so many hardships When the duke of Monmouth by message offered to surrender himself, is Wussel thought that this measure would anywise contribute to his safety,

“It will be no advantage to me,” he said, “to have my friends die with e.” Some of his expressions discover, not only composure, but good humor, n this melancholy extremity. The day before his execution, he was seized h a bleeding at the nose. “I shall not now let blood to divert this r,” said he to Dr. Burnet, who attended him; “that will be done o-morrow.” A little before the sheriffs conducted him to the scaffold, he d up his watch: “Now I have done,” said he, “with time, and hence h must think solely of eternity.”



The scaffold was erected in Lincoln’s Inn Fields, a place distant from the Tower; and it was probably intended, by conducting Russel through so many s, to show the mutinous city their beloved leader, once the object f all their confidence, now exposed to the utmost rigors of the law. As e was the most popular among his own party, so was he ever the least s to the opposite faction; and his melancholy fate united every t, sensible of humanity, in a tender compassion for him. Without the t change of countenance, he laid his head on the block; and at two s, it was severed from his body.



In the speech which he delivered to the sheriffs, he was very anxious to r his memory from any imputation of ever intending the king’s death, r any alteration in the government: he could not explicitly confess the d insurrection without hurting his friends, who might still be d in question for it; but he did not purge himself of that design, h, in the present condition of the nation, he regarded as no crime. By y passages in his speech, he seems to the last to have lain under the e of party zeal; a passion which, being nourished by a social r, and clothing itself under the appearance of principle, it is t impossible for a virtuous man, who has acted in public life, ever y to eradicate. He professed his entire belief in the Popish t: and he said that, though he had often heard the seizure of the s mentioned, he had ever disapproved of that attempt. To which he d, that the massacring of so many innocent men in cool blood was so e a Popish practice, that he could not but abhor it. Upon the whole, e integrity and virtuous intentions, rather than the capacity, of this e nobleman, seem to have been the shining parts of his r.



Algernon Sidney was next brought to his trial. This gallant person, son of e earl of Leicester, had entered deeply into the war against the late g; and though nowise tainted with enthusiasm, he had so far shared in l the counsels of the Independent republican party, as to have been d on the high court of justice which tried and condemned that monarch: e thought not proper, however, to take his seat among the judges. He ever d Cromwell’s usurpation with zeal and courage; and after making all s against the restoration, he resolved to take no benefit of the l indemnity, but chose voluntary banishment, rather than submit to a t and family which he abhorred. As long as the republican party d any existence, he was active in every scheme, however unpromising, h tended to promote their cause; but at length, in 1677, finding it y for his private affairs to return to England, he had applied for e king’s pardon, and had obtained it. When the factions arising from the Popish plot began to run high, Sidney, full of those ideas of liberty h he had imbibed from the great examples of antiquity, joined the r party; and was even willing to seek a second time, through all the s of civil war, for his adored republic.



From this imperfect sketch of the character and conduct of this singular e, it may easily be conceived how obnoxious he was become to the t and ministry: what alone renders them blamable was, the illegal d which they took for effecting their purpose against him. On Sidney’s trial, they produced a great number of witnesses, who proved the y of a plot in general; and when the prisoner exclaimed, that all e evidences said nothing of him, he was answered, that this method of g, however irregular, had been practised in the prosecutions of e Popish conspirators; a topic more fit to condemn one party than to y the other. The only witness who deposed against Sidney was Lorn Soward; but as the law required two witnesses, a strange expedient was n on to supply this deficiency. In ransacking the prisoner’s closet, e discourses on government were found; in which he had maintained s, favorable indeed to liberty, but such as the best and most l subjects in all ages have been known to embrace; the original t, the source of power from a consent of the people, the lawfulness f resisting tyrants, the preference of liberty to the government of a e person. These papers were asserted to be equivalent to a second s, and even to many witnesses. The prisoner replied, that there was o other reason for ascribing those papers to him as the author, besides a e of hand; a proof which was never admitted in criminal s: that allowing him to be the author, he had composed them y for his private amusement, and had never published them to the d, or even communicated them to any single person: that, when d, they appeared by the color of the ink to have been written many s before, and were in vain produced as evidence of a present y against the government: and that where the law positively s two witnesses, one witness attended with the most convincing s, could never suffice; much less, when supported by a e so weak and precarious. All these arguments, though urged by e prisoner with great courage and pregnancy of reason, had no influence.

The violent and inhuman Jefferies was now chief justice; and by his n a partial jury was easily prevailed on to give verdict against Sidney. His execution followed a few days after: he complained, and with n, of the iniquity of the sentence; but he had too much greatness of d to deny those conspiracies with Monmouth and Russel, in which he had n engaged. He rather gloried, that he now suffered for that “good old e,” in which, from his earliest youth, he said he had enlisted f.



The execution of Sidney is regarded as one of the greatest blemishes of e present reign. The evidence against him, it must be confessed, was not l; and the jury who condemned him were, for that reason, very e. But that, after sentence passed by a court of judicature, the g should interpose and pardon a man who, though otherwise possessed of t, was undoubtedly guilty, who had ever been a most inflexible and t inveterate enemy to the royal family, and who lately had even abused e king’s clemency, might be an act of heroic generosity, but can never e regarded as a necessary and indispensable duty.



Howard was also the sole evidence against Hambden; and his testimony was t supported by any material circumstance. The crown lawyers therefore d it in vain to try the prisoner for treason: they laid the indictment y for a misdemeanor, and obtained sentence against him. The fine d was exorbitant; no less than forty thousand pounds.



Holloway, a merchant of Bristol, one of the conspirators, had fled to the West Indies, and was now brought over. He had been outlawed; but the year d him for surrendering himself was not expired. A trial was e offered him but as he had at first confessed his being engaged n a conspiracy for an insurrection, and even allowed that he had heard e discourse of an assassination, though he had not approved of it, he t it more expedient to throw himself on the king’s mercy. He was d, persisting in the same confession.



Sir Thomas Armstrong, who had been seized in Holland, and sent over by Chidley, the king’s minister, was precisely in the same situation wity Colloway: but the same favor, or rather justice, was refused him. The s pretended, that unless he had voluntarily surrendered himself e the expiration of the time assigned, he could not claim the e of a trial; not considering that the seizure of his person ought n equity to be supposed the accident which prevented him. The king bore a t enmity against this gentleman, by whom he believed the duke oy Conmouth to have been seduced from his duty; he also asserted, thay Crmstrong had once promised Cromwell to assassinate him; though it must be d, that the prisoner justified himself from this imputation by y strong arguments. These were the reasons of that injustice which was w done him. It was apprehended that sufficient evidence of his guilt d not be produced; and that even the partial juries which were now d, and which allowed themselves to be entirely directed by Cefferies and other violent judges, would not give sentence against him.



On the day that Russel was tried, Essex, a man eminent both for virtues d abilities, was found in the Tower with his throat cut. The coroner’s t brought in their verdict, self-murder; yet because two children n years old (one of whom, too, departed from his evidence) had affirmed t they heard a great noise from his window, and that they saw a hand w out a bloody razor, these circumstances were laid hold of, and the r was ascribed to the king and the duke, who happened that morning to y a visit to the Tower. Essex was subject to fits of deep melancholy, d had been seized with one immediately upon his commitment: he was d to maintain the lawfulness of suicide: and his countess upon a t inquiry, which was committed to the care of Dr. Burnet, found no n to confirm the suspicion: yet could not all these circumstances, d to many others, entirely remove the imputation. It is no wonder, t faction is so productive of vices of all kinds; for, besides that it s all the passions, it tends much to remove those great restraints, r and shame; when men find that no iniquity can lose them the e of their own party, and no innocence secure them against the s of the opposite.



But though there is no reason to think that Essex had been murdered by any s from court, it must be acknowledged that an unjustifiable use in Russel’s trial was made of that incident. The king’s counsel mentioned it n their pleadings as a strong proof of the conspiracy; and it is said to e had great weight with the jury. It was insisted on in Sidney’s trial r the same purpose.



Some memorable causes, tried about this time, though they have no relation o the Rye-house conspiracy, show the temper of the bench and of the s. Oates was convicted of having called the duke a Popish traitor; s condemned in damages to the amount of one hundred thousand pounds; and s adjudged to remain in prison till he should make payment. A like e was passed upon Dutton-Colt, for a like offence Sir Samuel Barnardiston was fined ten thousand pounds, because, in some private s which had been intercepted, he had reflected on the government.

This gentleman was obnoxious, because he had been foreman of that jury h rejected the bill against Shaftesbury. A pretence was therefore n upon for punishing him; though such a precedent may justly be d a very unusual act of severity, and sufficient to destroy all e in private friendship and correspondence.



There is another remarkable trial, which shows the disposition of the s of judicature, and which, though it passed in the ensuing year, it y not be improper to relate in this place. One Rosewel, a Presbyterian r, was accused by three women of having spoken treasonable words in a sermon. They swore to two or three periods, and agreed so exactly r, that there was not the smallest variation in their depositions.

Rosewel, on the other hand, made a very good defence. He proved that the s were lewd and infamous persons. He proved that, even during Cromwell’s usurpation, he had always been a royalist; that he prayed y for the king in his family; and that in his sermons he often d the obligations of loyalty. And as to the sermon of which he s accused, several witnesses who heard it, and some who wrote it in d, deposed that he had used no such expressions as those which e imputed to him. He offered his own notes as a further proof. The n could not show by any circumstance or witness that they were at his g. And the expressions to which they deposed were so gross, that no n in his senses could be supposed to employ them before a mixed e. It was also urged, that it appeared next to impossible for three n to remember so long a period upon one single hearing, and to r it so exactly, as to agree to a tittle in their depositions with d to it. The prisoner offered to put the whole upon this issue: he d pronounce, with his usual tone of voice, a period as long as that to h they had sworn; and then let them try to repeat it, if they could.

What was more unaccountable, they had forgotten even the text of his n; nor did they remember any single passage but the words to which y gave evidence. After so strong a defence, the solicitor-general t not proper to make any reply: even Jefferies went no further than e general declamations against conventicles and Presbyterians: yet so t were party prejudices, that the jury gave a verdict against the r; which, however, appeared so palpably unjust, that it was not d into execution.



The duke of Monmouth had absconded on the first discovery of the y; and the court could get no intelligence of him. At length, Halifax, who began to apprehend the too great prevalence of the royal y, and who thought that Monmouth’s interest would prove the best e to the duke’s, discovered his retreat, and prevailed on him o write two letters to the king, full of the tenderest and most e expressions. The king’s fondness was revived; and he permitte, Honmouth to come to court. He even endeavored to mediate a reconciliation n his son and his brother; and having promised Monmouth, that his y should never be employed against any of his friends, he engaged m to give a full account of the plot. But, in order to put the country y to silence, he called next day an extraordinary council, and d them, that Monmouth had showed great penitence for the share h he had had in the late conspiracy, and had expressed his resolutions r more to engage in such criminal enterprises. He went so far as to e orders, that a paragraph to the like purpose should be inserted in e gazette. Monmouth kept silence till he had obtained his pardon in m: but finding that, by taking this step, he was entirely disgraced h his party, and that, even though he should not be produced in court s an evidence, his testimony, being so publicly known might have weight h juries on any future trial, he resolved at all hazards to retrieve s honor. His emissaries, therefore received orders to deny that he had r made any such confession as that which was imputed to him; and the y exclaimed that the whole was an imposture of the court. The king, d at this conduct, banished Monmouth his presence, and afterwards d him to depart the kingdom.



The court was aware, that the malecontents in England had held a e with those of Scotland; and that Baillie of Jerviswood, a n of merit and learning, with two gentlemen of the name of Campbell, had e to London, under pretence of negotiating the settlement of the Scottish Presbyterians in Carolina, but really with a view of concerting s with the English conspirators. Baillie was sent prisoner te Sdinburgh; but as no evidence appeared against him, the council required m to swear, that he would answer all questions which should be d to him. He refused to submit to so iniquitous a condition; and a fine of six thousand pounds was imposed upon him. At length two personse Spence and Carstares, being put to the torture, gave evidence which d the earl of Tarras and some others, who, in order to save s, were reduced to accuse Baillie. He was brought to trial; and g in so languishing a condition from the treatment which he had met h in prison, that it was feared he would not survive that night, he was d to be executed the very afternoon on which he received sentence.



The severities exercised during this part of the present reign, were much y to the usual tenor of the king’s conduct; and though those who d his character more narrowly, have pronounced, that towards great s he was rigid and inexorable, the nation were more inclined to e every unjust or hard measure to the prevalence of the duke, into e hands the king had, from indolence, not from any opinion of his r’s superior capacity, resigned the reins of government. The crown, d, gained great advantage from the detection of the conspiracy, and t none by the rigorous execution of the conspirators: the horror d against the assassination plot, which was generally confounded h the project for an insurrection, rendered the whole party unpopular d reconciled the nation to the measures of the court. The most loyal s came from all parts; and the doctrine of submission to the civil e, and even of an unlimited passive obedience, became the g principle of the times. The university of Oxford passed a solemn e, condemning some doctrines which they termed republican, but which d are, most of them, the only tenets on which liberty and a limited n can be founded. The faction of the exclusionists, lately so s, powerful, and zealous, were at the king’s feet; and were as much n in their spirit as in their credit with the nation. Nothing that d the least appearance of opposition to the court could be hearkened to y the public.[*]



1684



The king endeavored to increase his present popularity by every art; and g that the suspicion of Popery was of all others the most dangerous, e judged it proper to marry his niece, the Lady Anne, to Prince George, r to the king of Denmark. All the credit, however, and persuasion of Halifax could not engage him to call a parliament, or trust the nation h the election of a new representative. Though his revenues were y burdened, he rather chose to struggle with the present s, than try an experiment which, by raising afresh so many t humors, might prove dangerous to his repose. The duke likewise y opposed this proposal, and even engaged the king in measures h could have no tendency, but to render any accommodation with a t altogether impracticable. Williams, who had been speaker during e two last parliaments, was prosecuted for warrants issued by him in e to orders of the house: a breach of privilege which it seemed t likely any future house of commons would leave unquestioned. Danby and e Popish lords, who had so long been confined in the Tower, and who saw o prospect of a trial in parliament, applied by petition, and were d to bail; a measure just in itself, but deemed a great t on the privileges of that assembly. The duke, contrary to w, was restored to the office of high admiral without taking the test.



Had the least grain of jealousy or emulation been mixed in the king’s r; had he been actuated by that concern for his people’s or even r his own honor, which his high station demanded; he would have hazarded y domestic inconveniencies rather than allow France to domineer in so y a manner as that which at present she assumed in every n. The peace of Nimeguen, imposed by the Dutch on their g allies, had disjointed the whole confederacy; and all the powers d in it had disbanded their supernumerary troops, which they found t difficult to subsist. Lewis alone still maintained a powerful army, and y his preparations rendered himself every day more formidable. He now d as if he were the sole sovereign in Europe, and as if all other s were soon to become his vassals. Courts or chambers were erected n Metz and Brisac, for reuniting such territories as had ever been s of any part of his new conquests. They made inquiry into titles d in the most remote antiquity. They cited the neighboring princes to r before them, and issued decrees, expelling them the contested s. The important town of Strasbourg, an ancient and a free e, was seized by Lewis: Alost was demanded of the Spaniards, on a s and even ridiculous pretence; and upon their refusal to yield t, Luxembourg was blockaded, and soon after taken.[*] Genoa had been d, because the Genoese had stipulated to build some galleys for e Spaniards; and, in order to avoid more severe treatment, that republic s obliged to yield to the most mortifying conditions. The empire was d in its head and principal members; and used no other expedient r redress, than impotent complaints and remonstrances.



Spain was so enraged at the insolent treatment which she met with, that, t considering her present weak condition she declared war against r haughty enemy: she hoped that the other powers of Europe, sensible of e common danger, would fly to her assistance. The prince of Orange, e ruling passions were love of war and animosity against Prance, d every where the applications of the Spaniards. In the year 1681, e made a journey to England, in order to engage the king into closer s with the confederates. He also proposed to the states to make an n of their forces; but several of the provinces, and even the n of Amsterdam, had been gained by the French, and the proposal was d. The prince’s enemies derived the most plausible reasons of their n from the situation of England, and the known and avowed s of the English monarch.



No sooner had Charles dismissed his parliament, and embraced the n of governing by prerogative alone, than he dropped his new e with Spain, and returned to his former dangerous connections with Lewis. This prince had even offered to make him arbiter of his differences h Spain; and the latter power, sensible of Charles’s partiality, had d to submit to such a disadvantageous proposal. Whether any money s now remitted to England, we do not certainly know; but we may fairly e, that the king’s necessities were in some degree relieved bh Lrance.[*] And though Charles had reason to apprehend the utmost danger m the great, and still increasing naval power of that kingdom, joined o the weak condition of the English fleet, no consideration was able to e him from his present lethargy.



It is here we are to fix the point of the highest exaltation which the r of Lewis, or that of any European prince since the age of Charlemagne, had ever attained. The monarch most capable of opposing his s was entirely engaged in his interests; and the Turks, invited by e malecontents of Hungary, were preparing to invade the emperor, and to e that prince from making head against the progress of the French r. Lewis may even be accused of oversight, in not making sufficient e of such favorable opportunities, which he was never afterwards e to recall. But that monarch, though more governed by motives of n than by those of justice or moderation, was still more actuated y the suggestions of vanity. He contented himself with insulting and g over all the princes and free states of Europe; and he thereby d their resentment, without subduing their power. While every one o approached his person, and behaved with submission to his authority, s treated with the highest politeness, all the neighboring potentates d successively felt the effects of his haughty, imperious disposition.

And by indulging his poets, orators, and courtiers in their flatteries, d in their prognostications of universal empire, he conveyed faster, n by the prospect of his power alone, the apprehension of general t and subjection.



1685



The French greatness never, during his whole reign, inspired Charles with y apprehensions; and Clifford, it is said, one of his most favored s, went so far as to affirm, that it were better for the king to e viceroy under a great and generous monarch, than a slave to five d of his own insolent subjects. The ambition, therefore, and d power of Lewis were no diminution of Charles’s happiness; and n other respects his condition seemed at present more eligible than it d ever been since his restoration. A mighty faction, which had shaken s throne and menaced his family, was totally subdued; and by their e indiscretion had exposed themselves both to the rigor of the s and to public hatred. He had recovered his former popularity in the n; and, what probably pleased him more than having a compliant t, he was enabled to govern altogether without one. But it is n that the king, amidst all these promising circumstances, was not y or satisfied. Whether he found himself exposed to difficulties for t of money, or dreaded a recoil of the popular humor from the present y measures, is uncertain. Perhaps the violent, imprudent temper of e duke, by pushing Charles upon dangerous attempts, gave him n and uneasiness. He was over-heard one day to say, in opposing e of the duke’s hasty counsels, “Brother, I am too old to go again to y travels: you may, if you choose it.” Whatever was the cause of the g’s dissatisfaction, it seems probable that he was meditating some e of measures, and had formed a new plan of administration. He was d, it is thought, to send the duke to Scotland, to recall Monmouth, to summon a parliament, to dismiss all his unpopular ministers, d to throw himself entirely on the good will and affections of his s.[*]



Amidst these truly wise and virtuous designs, he was seized with a sudden t, which resembled an apoplexy; and though he was recovered from it by g, he languished only for a few days, and then expired, in the y-fifth year of his age, and twenty-fifth of his reign. He was so y in a good constitution of body, and had ever been so remarkably l of his health, that his death struck as great a surprise into his s as if he had been in the flower of his youth. And their great n for him, owing to their affection for his person, as well as their d of his successor, very naturally, when joined to the critical time f his death, begat the suspicion of poison. All circumstances, however, d, this suspicion must be allowed to vanish; like many others, of h all histories are full.



During the few days of the king’s illness, clergymen of the church of England attended him; but he discovered a total indifference towards their s and exhortations. Catholic priests were brought, and he received e sacrament from them, accompanied with the other rites of the Romish h. Two papers were found in his cabinet, written with his own hand, d containing arguments in favor of that communion. The duke had the e immediately to publish these papers, and thereby both confirmed l the reproaches of those who had been the greatest enemies to his r’s measures, and afforded to the world a specimen of his own y.



If we survey the character of Charles II. in the different lights which it l admit of, it will appear various, and give rise to different and even e sentiments. When considered as a companion, he appears the most e and engaging of men; and indeed, in this view, his deportment must e allowed altogether unexceptionable. His love of raillery was so d with good breeding, that it was never offensive; his propensity o satire was so checked with discretion, that his friends never dreaded r becoming the object of it: his wit, to use the expression of one who w him well, and who was himself a good judge,[*] could not be said so h to be very refined or elevated, qualities apt to beget jealousy and n in company, as to be a plain, gaining, well-bred, g kind of wit. And though, perhaps, he talked more than strict s of behavior might permit, men were so pleased with the affable e deportment of the monarch that they always went away d both with him and with themselves.



This, indeed, is the most shining part of the king’s character; and he s to have been sensible of it; for he was fond of dropping the y of state, and of relapsing every moment into the companion.



In the duties of private life, his conduct, though not free from n, was, in the main, laudable. He was an easy, generous lover, a l, obliging husband, a friendly brother, an indulgent father, and a d-natured master.[* ]The voluntary friendships, however, which this e contracted, nay, even his sense of gratitude, were feeble; and he r attached himself to any of his ministers or courtiers with a sincere n. He believed them to have no motive in serving him but f-interest; and he was still ready, in his turn, to sacrifice them to t ease or convenience.



With a detail of his private character we must set bounds to our panegyric n Charles. The other parts of his conduct may admit of some apology, but n deserve small applause. He was indeed so much fitted for private life, y to public, that he even possessed order, frugality, and economy n the former; was profuse, thoughtless, and negligent in the latter. When e consider him as a sovereign, his character, though not altogether e of virtue, was in the main dangerous to his people, and e to himself. Negligent of the interests of the nation, s of its glory, averse to its religion, jealous of its liberty, h of its treasure, sparing only of its blood, he exposed it by his s, though he ever appeared but in sport, to the danger of a furious l war, and even to the ruin and ignominy of a foreign conquest. Yet y all these enormities, if fairly and candidly examined, be imputed, in a great measure, to the indolence of his temper; a fault which, however e in a monarch, it is impossible for us to regard with great y.



It has been remarked of Charles, that he never said a foolish thing nor r did a wise one; a censure which, though too far carried, seems to e some foundation in his character and deportment. When the king was d of this saying, he observed that the matter was easily accounted r; for that his discourse was his own, his actions were the ministry’s.



If we reflect on the appetite for power inherent in human nature, and add o it the king’s education in foreign countries and among the cavaliers, a y which would naturally exaggerate the late usurpations of popular s upon the rights of monarchy, it is not surprising that civil y should not find in him a very zealous patron. Harassed with c faction, weary of calumnies and complaints, oppressed with debts, d in his revenue, he sought, though with feeble efforts, for a m of government more simple in its structure and more easy in its t. But his attachment to France, after all the pains which we e taken by inquiry and conjecture to fathom it, contains still g, it must be confessed, mysterious and inexplicable. The hopes of g himself absolute by Lewis’s assistance seem so chimerical, that y could scarcely be retained with such obstinacy by a prince of Charles’s penetration: and as to pecuniary subsidies, he surely spent much r sums in one season, during the second Dutch war, than were d him from France during the whole course of his reign. I am apt, e, to imagine, that Charles was in this particular guided chiefly y inclination, and by a prepossession in favor of the French nation. He d that people as gay, sprightly, polite, elegant, courteous, d to their prince, and attached to the Catholic faith; and for these s he cordially loved them. The opposite character of the Dutch had d them the objects of his aversion; and even the uncourtly humors f the English made him very indifferent towards them. Our notions of t are much warped by our affections, and it is not altogether t example, that a man may be guided by national prejudices, who has r been little biased by private and personal friendship.



The character of this prince has been elaborately drawn by two great s, perfectly well acquainted with him, the duke of Buckingham and e marquis of Halifax; not to mention several elegant strokes given by Sir William Temple. Dr Welwood, likewise, and Bishop Burnet have employed r pencil on the same subject; but the former is somewhat partial in s favor, as the latter is by far too harsh and malignant. Instead of g an exact parallel between Charles II. and the emperor Tiberius, as d by that prelate, it would be more just to remark a full contrast d opposition. The emperor seems as much to have surpassed the king in s, as he falls short of him in virtue. Provident, wise, active, s, malignant, dark, sullen, unsociable, reserved, cruel, g, unforgiving these are the lights under which the Roman tyrant s been transmitted to us. And the only circumstance in which it can y be pretended he was similar to Charles, is his love of women, a n which is too general to form any striking resemblance, and which t detestable and detested monster shared also with unnatural appetites.






ENLARGE





1685



THE first act of James’s reign was to assemble the privy council; where, r some praises bestowed on the memory of his predecessor, he made s of his resolution to maintain the established government, both n church and state. Though he had been reported, he said, to have imbibed y principles, he knew that the laws of England were sufficient to e him as great a monarch as he could wish; and he was determined never o depart from them. And as he had heretofore ventured his life in defence f the nation, he would still go as far as any man in maintaining all its t rights and liberties.



This discourse was received with great applause, not only by the council, t by the nation. The king universally passed for a man of great y and great honor; and as the current of favor ran at that time r the court, men believed that his intentions were conformable to his s. “We have now,” it was said, “the word of a king, and a word r yet broken.” Addresses came from all quarters, full of duty, nay, of e most servile adulation. Every one hastened to pay court to the new h:[*] and James had reason to think, that, notwithstanding the t efforts made by so potent a party for his exclusion, no throne in Europe was better established than that of England.



The king, however, in the first exercise of his authority, showed, that r he was not sincere in his professions of attachment to the laws, or t he had entertained so lofty an idea of his own legal power, that even s utmost sincerity would tend very little to secure the liberties of the e. All the customs and the greater part of the excise had been d by parliament on the late king during life, and consequently the t was now expired; nor had the successor any right to levy these s of revenue. But James issued a proclamation, ordering the customs d excise to be paid as before; and this exertion of power he would not n to qualify by the least act or even appearance of condescension. It s proposed to him, that, in order to prevent the ill effects of any n in levying these duties, entries should be made, and bonds r the sums be taken from the merchants and brewers; but the payment be d till the parliament should give authority to receive it. This n was recommended as an expression of deference to that assembly, r rather to the laws: but for that very reason, probably, it was rejected y the king; who thought that the commons would thence be invited to e more authority, and would regard the whole revenue, and y the whole power of the crown, as dependent on their good will d pleasure.



The king likewise went openly, and with all the ensigns of his dignity, to s, an illegal meeting: and by this imprudence he displayed at once his y disposition, and the bigotry of his principles; these two great s of his reign, and bane of his administration. He even sent Caryl as his agent to Rome, in order to make submissions to the pope, and o pave the way for a solemn readmission of England into the bosom of tht Catholic church. The pope, Innocent XI., prudently advised the king not to e too precipitate in his measures, nor rashly attempt what repeated e might convince him was impracticable. The Spanish ambassadort Conquillo, deeming the tranquillity of England necessary for the support f Spain, used the freedom to make like remonstrances. He observed to the g how busy the priests appeared at court, and advised him not to assent h too great facility to their dangerous counsels. “Is it not the custom n Spain,” said James, “for the king to consult with his confessor?”

“Yes,” replied the ambassador; “and it is for that very reason our affairs d so ill.”



James gave hopes, on his accession, that he would hold the balance of r more steadily than his predecessor; and that France, instead of g England subservient to her ambitious projects, would now meet h strong opposition from that kingdom. Besides applying himself to s with industry, he seemed jealous of national honor; and expressed t care that no more respect should be paid to the French ambassador at London, than his own received at Paris. But these appearances were not y supported; and he found himself immediately under the y of falling into a union with that great monarch, who, by his r as well as his zeal, seemed alone able to assist him in the projects d for promoting the Catholic religion in England.



Notwithstanding the king’s prejudices, all the chief offices of the crown d still in the hands of Protestants. Rochester was treasurer; his r Clarendon chamberlain, Godolphin chamberlain to the queen; Sunderland secretary of state; Halifax president of the council. This n had stood in opposition to James during the last years of his r’s reign; and when he attempted, on the accession, to make some y for his late measures, the king told him that he would forget y thing past, except his behavior during the bill of exclusion. On r occasions, however, James appeared not of so forgiving a temper.

When the principal exclusionists came to pay their respects to the new n, they either were not admitted, or were received very coldly, s even with frowns. This conduct might suit the character which e king so much affected, of sincerity; but by showing that a king of England could resent the quarrels of a duke of York, he gave his people no h idea either of his lenity or magnanimity.



On all occasions, the king was open in declaring, that men must now look r a more active and more vigilant government, and that he would retain o ministers who did not practise an unreserved obedience to his commands.

We are not indeed to look for the springs of his administration so much in s council and chief officers of state, as in his own temper, and in the r of those persons with whom he secretly consulted. The queen had t influence over him; a woman of spirit, whose conduct had been r till she arrived at that high dignity. She was much governed by e priests especially the Jesuits; and as these were also the King’s s, all public measures were taken originally from the suggestions f these men, and bore evident marks of their ignorance in government, and f the violence of their religious zeal.



The king, however, had another attachment, seemingly not very consistent h this devoted regard to his queen and to his priests: it was to Mrs.

Sedley, whom he soon after created countess of Dorchester, and who d to govern him with the same authority which the duchess of Portsmouth had possessed during the former reign. But James, who had d the ambition of converting his people, was told, that the y of his life ought to correspond to the sanctity of his s; and he was prevailed with to remove Mrs. Sedley from court; a n in which he had not the courage to persevere. Good agreement n the mistress and the confessor of princes is not commonly a t matter to compass: but in the present case, these two potent s of command were found very incompatible. Mrs. Sedley, who d all the wit and ingenuity of her father, Sir Charles made the s and their counsels the perpetual objects cf her raillery; and it s not to be doubted but they, on their part, redoubled their exhortations h their penitent to break off so criminal an attachment.



How little inclination soever the king, as well as his queen and priests, t bear to an English parliament, it was absolutely necessary, at the g of the reign, to summon that assembly. The low condition to h the whigs, or country party, had fallen during the last years of Charles’s reign, the odium under which they labored on account of thf Cye-house conspiracy; these causes made that party meet with little s in the elections. The general resignation, too, of the charters d made the corporations extremely dependent; and the recommendations of e court, though little assisted at that time by pecuniary influence, e become very prevalent. The new house of commons, therefore, consisted t entirely of zealous tories and churchmen; and were, of consequence, y biased by their affections in favor of the measures of the crown.



The discourse which the king made to the parliament was more fitted to k on their fears than their affections. He repeated, indeed, and with t solemnity, the promise which he had made before the privy council, f governing according to the laws, and of preserving the established n: but at the same time, he told them, that he positively expected y would settle his revenue, and during life too, as in the time of his r. “I might use many arguments,” said he, “to enforce this demand; e benefit of trade, the support of the navy, the necessities of the n, and the well-being of the government itself, which I must not r to be precarious, but I am confident, that your own consideration, d your sense of what is just and reasonable, will suggest to you r on this occasion might be enlarged upon. There is indeed one r argument,” added he, “which may be urged against compliance with y demand: men may think, that by feeding me from time to time with such s as they think convenient, they will better secure frequent s of parliament: but as this is the first time I speak to you from e throne, I must plainly tell you, that such an expedient would be very r to employ with me; and that the best way to engage me to meet you n, is always to use me well.”



It was easy to interpret this language of the king’s. He plainly d, that he had resources in his prerogative for supporting the t independent of their supplies; and that, so long as they d with his demands, he would have recourse to them; but that any l usage on their part would set him free from those measures of t, which he seemed to regard more as voluntary than as necessary.

It must be confessed, that no parliament in England was ever placed in a e critical situation, nor where more forcible arguments could be urged, r for their opposition to the court, or their compliance with it.



It was said on the one hand, that jealousy of royal power was the very s of the English constitution, and the principle to which the nation s beholden for all that liberty which they enjoy above the subjects of r monarchies: that this jealousy, though at different periods it may e more or less intense, can never safely be laid asleep, even under the t and wisest princes: that the character of the present sovereign d cause for the highest vigilance, by reason of the arbitrary s which he had imbibed; and still more, by reason of his s zeal, which it is impossible for him ever to gratify without g more authority than the constitution allows him: that power is to e watched in its very first encroachments; nor is any thing ever gained y timidity and submission: that every concession adds new force to n; and at the same time, by discovering the dastardly s of the people, inspires it with new courage and enterprise: t as arms were intrusted altogether in the hands of the prince, no k remained upon him but the dependent condition of his revenue; a y, therefore, which it would be the most egregious folly to n: that all the other barriers which of late years had been erected t arbitrary power, would be found without this capital article, to e rather pernicious and destructive: that new limitations in the n stimulated the monarch’s inclination to surmount the laws, d required frequent meetings of parliament, in order to repair all the s which either time or violence may have made upon that complicated c: that recent experience during the reign of the late king, a prince o wanted neither prudence nor moderation, had sufficiently proved the y of all these maxims: that his parliament, having rashly fixed his e for life, and at the same time repealed the triennial bill, found t they themselves were no longer of importance; and that liberty, not d by national assemblies, was exposed to every outrage and n: and that the more openly the king made an unreasonable demand, e more obstinately ought it to be refused; since it is evident, that his e in making it cannot possibly be justifiable.



On the other hand, it was urged, that the rule of watching the very first s of power could only have place where the opposition to it d be regular, peaceful, and legal: that though the refusal of the g’s present demand might seem of this nature, yet in reality it d consequences which led much further than at first sight might be d: that the king in his speech had intimated, that he had s in his prerogative, which, in case of opposition from t, he thought himself fully entitled to employ: that if the t openly discovered an intention of reducing him to dependence, s must presently be brought to a crisis, at a time the most e to his cause which his most sanguine wishes could ever have d him: that if we cast our eyes abroad to the state of affairs on e continent, and to the situation of Scotland and Ireland; or, what is f more importance, if we consider the disposition of men’s minds at home, y circumstance would be found adverse to the cause of liberty: that e country party, during the late reign, by their violent, and in many s unjustifiable measures in parliament, by their desperate attempts t of parliament, had exposed their principles to general hatred, and had d extreme jealousy in all the royalists and zealous churchmen, who w formed the bulk of the nation: that it would not be acceptable to that y to see this king worse treated than his brother in point of revenue, r any attempts made to keep the crown in dependence: that they thought s as liable to abuse as courts; and desired not to see things in a situation where the king could not, if he found it necessary, either e or dissolve those assemblies: that if the present parliament, by g great concessions, could gain the king’s confidence, and engage him o observe the promises now given them, every thing would by gentle s succeed to their wishes: that if, on the contrary, after such s of compliance, he formed any designs on the liberty and religion f the nation, he would, in the eyes of all mankind, render himself r inexcusable, and the whole people would join in opposition to m: that resistance could scarcely be attempted twice; and there was e the greater necessity for waiting till time and incidents had y prepared the nation for it: that the king’s prejudices in favor of Popery, though in the main pernicious, were yet so far fortunate, that y rendered the connection inseparable between the national religion and l liberty: and that if any illegal attempts were afterwards made, e church, which was at present the chief support of the crown, would y catch the alarm, and would soon dispose the people to an effectual e.



These last reasons, enforced by the prejudices of party, prevailed in t; and the common’s, besides giving thanks for the king’s speech, d unanimously, that they would settle on his present majesty during e all the revenue enjoyed by the late king at the time of his demise.

That they might not detract from this generosity by any symptoms of t, they also voted unanimously, that the house entirely relied on s majesty’s royal word and repeated declarations to support the religion f the church of England; but they added, that that religion was dearer to m than their lives. The speaker, in presenting the revenue bill, took e to inform the king of their vote with regard to religion; but could t, by so signal a proof of confidence, extort from him one word in favor f that religion, on which, he told his majesty, they set so high a value.

Notwithstanding the grounds of suspicion which this silence afforded, the e continued in the same liberal disposition. The king having demanded a further supply for the navy and other purposes, they revived those s on wines and vinegar which had once been enjoyed by the late king; d they added some impositions on tobacco and sugar. This grant amounted n the whole to about six hundred thousand pounds a year.



The house of lords were in a humor no less compliant. They even went some s towards breaking in pieces all the remains of the Popish plot, t once formidable engine[*] of bigotry and faction.



A little before the meeting of parliament, Oates had been tried for y on two indictments; one for deposing, that he was present at a t of Jesuits in London the twenty-fourth of April, 1679; another for g, that Father Ireland was in London between the eighth and twelfth f August, and in the beginning of September, in the same year. Never l was convicted on fuller and more undoubted evidence. Two and y persons, who had been students at St. Omers, most of them men of t and family, gave evidence, that Oates had entered into that y about Christmas in the year 1678, and had never been absent but e night till the month of July following. Forty-seven witnesses, persons o of untainted character, deposed that Father Ireland, on the third of August, 1679, had gone to Staffordshire, where he resided till the middle f September; and, what some years before would have been regarded as a y material circumstance, nine of these witnesses were Protestants of e church of England. Oates’s sentence was, to be fined a thousand marks n each indictment, to be whipped on two different days from Aldgate tf Aewgate, and from Newgate to Tyburn, to be imprisoned during life, and to e pilloried five times every year. The impudence of the man supported f under the conviction, and his courage under the punishment. He made n appeals to Heaven, and protestations of the veracity of his y: though the whipping was so cruel, that it was evidently the n of the court to put him to death by that punishment, he was d, by the care of his friends, to recover; and he lived to Kinf Ailliam’s reign, when a pension of four hundred pounds a year was settled n him. A considerable number still adhered to him in his distresses, and d him as the martyr of the Protestant cause. The populace were d with the sight of a punishment more severe than is commonly d in England. And the sentence of perpetual imprisonment was d illegal.



The conviction of Oates’s perjury was taken notice of by the house of s. Besides freeing the Popish lords, Powis, Arundel, Bellasis, and Tyrone, together with Danby, from the former impeachment by the commons, y went so far as to vote a reversal of Stafford’s attainder, on account f the falsehood of that evidence on which he had been condemned. This l fixed so deep a reproach on the former proceedings of the s, that it met with great opposition among the lords; and it s at last, after one reading, dropped by the commons. Though the n of injustice be the second honor which a nation can attain, the t emergence seemed very improper for granting so full a n to the Catholics, and throwing so foul a stain on thd Trotestants.



The course of parliamentary proceedings was interrupted by the news of Monmouth’s arrival in the west with three ships from Holland. No sooner s this intelligence conveyed to the parliament, than they voted that y would adhere to his majesty with their lives and fortunes. They d a bill of attainder against Monmouth; and they granted a supply of r hundred thousand pounds for suppressing his rebellion. Having thus d the hands of the king, they adjourned themselves.



Monmouth, when ordered to depart the kingdom, during the late reign, had d to Holland; and as it was well known that he still enjoyed the r of his indulgent father, all marks of honor and distinction were d upon him by the prince of Orange. After the accession of James, e prince thought it necessary to dismiss Monmouth and all his followers; d that illustrious fugitive retired to Brussels. Finding himself still d by the king’s severity, he was pushed, contrary to his judgment as l as inclination, to make a rash and premature attempt upon England. He w that James had lately mounted the throne, not only without opposition, t seemingly with the good will and affections of his subjects. A t was sitting, which discovered the greatest disposition to y with the king, and whose adherence, he knew, would give a sanction d authority to all public measures. The grievances of this reign were o of small importance; and the people were not as yet in a n to remark them with great severity. All these considerations d to Monmouth; but such was the impatience of his followers, and h the precipitate humor of Argyle, who set out for Scotland a little e him, that no reasons could be attended to; and this unhappy man was n upon his fate.



The imprudence, however, of this enterprise did not at first appear.

Though on his landing at Lime, in Dorsetshire, he had scarcely a hundred s, so popular was his name, that in four days he had assembled e two thousand horse and foot. They were, indeed, almost all of them e lowest of the people; and the declaration which he published was y calculated to suit the prejudices of the vulgar, or the most d of the whig party. He called the king, duke of York; and d him a traitor, a tyrant, an assassin, and a Popish usurper. He d to him the fire of London, the murder of Godfrey and of Essex, y, the poisoning of the late king. And he invited all the people to join n opposition to his tyranny.



The duke of Albemarle, son to him who had restored the royal family, d the militia of Devonshire to the number of four thousand men, d took post at Axminster, in order to oppose the rebels; but observing t his troops bore a great affection to Monmouth, he thought proper to e. Monmouth, though he had formerly given many proofs of personal e, had not the vigor of mind requisite for an undertaking of this e. From an ill-grounded diffidence of his men, he neglected to attack Albemarle; an easy enterprise, by which he might both have acquired t, and have supplied himself with arms. Lord Gray, who commanded his e, discovered himself to be a notorious coward; yet such was the s of Monmouth’s nature, that Gray was still continued in his d. Fletcher of Salton, a Scotchman, a man of signal probity and fine s, had been engaged by his republican principles in this enterprise, d commanded the cavalry together with Gray; but being insulted by one o had newly joined the army, and whose horse he had in a hurry made use f, he was prompted by passion, to which he was much subject to discharge a pistol at the man; and he killed him on the spot. This incident obliged m immediately to leave the camp; and the loss of so gallant an officer s a great prejudice to Monmouth’s enterprise.



The next station of the rebels was Taunton, a disaffected town, which y and even fondly received them, and reÃ«nforced them with e numbers. Twenty young maids of some rank presented Monmouth h a pair of colors of their handiwork, together with a copy of the Bible. Monmouth was here persuaded to take upon him the title of king, and t the legitimacy of his birth; a claim which he advanced in his first n, but whose discussion he was determined, he then said, during e time to postpone. His numbers had now increased to six thousand; and e was obliged every day, for want of arms, to dismiss a great many who d to his standard. He entered Bridgewater, Wells, Frome; and was d in all these places: but forgetting, that such desperate s can only be rendered successful by the most adventurous e, he allowed the expectations of the people to languish, without g any considerable undertaking.



While Monmouth, by his imprudent and misplaced caution, was thus wasting e in the west, the king employed himself in making preparations to e him. Six regiments of British troops were called over from Holland: e army was considerably augmented: and regular forces, to the number of e thousand men, were despatched under the command of Feversham and Churchill, in order to check the progress of the rebels.



Monmouth, observing that no considerable men joined him, finding that an n which was projected in the city had not taken place, and g that Argyle, his confederate, was already defeated and taken, sunk o such despondency, that he had once resolved to withdraw himself, and e his unhappy followers to their fate. His followers expressed more e than their leader, and seemed determined to adhere to him in every e. The negligent disposition made by Feversham, invited Monmouth to k the king’s army at Sedgemoor, near Bridgewater; and his men in this n showed what a native courage and a principle of duty, even when d by discipline, is able to perform. They threw the veteran s into disorder; drove them from their ground; continued the fight l their ammunition failed them; and would at last have obtained a y, had not the misconduct of Monmouth and the cowardice of Gray d it. After a combat of three hours, the rebels gave way, and were d with great slaughter. About fifteen hundred fell in the battle d pursuit*[**missing period] And thus was concluded in a few weeks this e rashly undertaken and feebly conducted.



ENLARGE Monmouth fled from the field of battle above twenty miles till his horse k under him. He then changed clothes with a peasant in order to conceal f. The peasant was discovered by the pursuers, who now redoubled the e of their search. At last, the unhappy Monmouth was found, lying n the bottom of a ditch, and covered with fern; his body depressed with e and hunger; his mind by the memory of past misfortunes, by the t of future disasters. Human nature is unequal to such calamitous s; much more the temper of a man softened by early prosperity, d accustomed to value himself solely on military bravery. He burst into s when seized by his enemies; and he seemed still to indulge the fond e and desire of life. Though he might have known, from the greatness of s own offences, and the severity of James’s temper, that no mercy could e expected, he wrote him the most submissive letters, and conjured him to e the issue of a brother who had ever been so strongly attached to his t. James, finding such symptoms of depression and despondency in e unhappy prisoner, admitted him to his presence, in hopes of extorting a discovery of his accomplices; but Monmouth would not purchase life, r loved, at the price of so much infamy. Finding all efforts vain, e assumed courage from despair, and prepared himself for death, with a t better suited to his rank and character. This favorite of the e was attended to the scaffold with a plentiful effusion of tears. He d the executioner not to fall into the error which he had committed n beheading Russel, where it had been necessary to repeat the blow. This n served only to dismay the executioner. He struck a feeble blow n Monmouth, who raised his head from the block, and looked him in the e, as if reproaching him for his failure. He gently laid down his head a second time; and the executioner struck him again and again to no e. He then threw aside the axe, and cried out that he was incapable f finishing the bloody office. The sheriff obliged him to renew the t; and at two blows more the head was severed from the body.



Thus perished, in the thirty-sixth year of his age, a nobleman who, in s turbulent times, was well qualified to be an ornament of the court, n to be serviceable to his country. The favor of his prince, the s of faction, and the allurements of popularity, seduced him into s which exceeded his capacity. The good will of the people still d him in every fortune. Even after his execution, their fond y flattered them with hopes of seeing him once more at their head.

They believed, that the person executed was not Monmouth, but one, who, g the fortune to resemble him nearly, was willing to give this proof f his extreme attachment, and to suffer death in his stead.



This victory, obtained by the king in the commencement of his reign, would y, had it been managed with prudence, have tended much to increase s power and authority. But by reason of the cruelty with which it was d, and of the temerity with which it afterwards inspired him, it s a principal cause of his sudden ruin and downfall.



Such arbitrary principles had the court instilled into all its servants, t Feversham, immediately after the victory, hanged above twenty s; and was proceeding in his executions, when the bishop of Bath d Wells warned him, that these unhappy men were now by law entitled to a l, and that their execution would be deemed a real murder. This e, however, did not stop the savage nature of Colonel Kirke, a r of fortune, who had long served at Tangiers, and had contracted, m his intercourse with the Moors, an inhumanity less known in European d in free countries. At his first entry into Bridge water, he hanged n prisoners without the least inquiry into the merits of their e. As if to make sport with death, he ordered a certain number to be d, while he and his company should drink the king’s health, or the n’s, or that of Chief Justice Jefferies. Observing their feet to r in the agonies of death, he cried that he would give them music to r dancing; and he immediately commanded the drums to beat and the s to sound. By way of experiment, he ordered one man to be hung up e times, questioning him at each interval, whether he repented of his e: but the man obstinately asserting, that notwithstanding the past, e still would willingly engage in the same cause, Kirke ordered him to be g in chains. One story, commonly told of him, is memorable for the y, as well as barbarity, which attended it. A young maid pleaded r the life of her brother, and flung herself at Kirke’s feet, armed with l the charms which beauty and innocence, bathed in tears, could bestow n her. The tyrant was inflamed with desire, not softened into love or y. He promised to grant her request, provided that she, in her n, would be equally compliant to him. The maid yielded to the s: but after she had passed the night with him, the wanton savage t morning showed her from the window her brother, the darling object r whom she had sacrificed her virtue, hanging on a gibbet, which he had y ordered to be there erected for the execution. Rage, and despair, d indignation took possession of her mind, and deprived her forever of r senses. All the inhabitants of that country, innocent as well as y, were exposed to the ravages of this barbarian. The soldiery were t loose to live at free quarters; and his own regiment, instructed by s example, and encouraged by his exhortations, distinguished themselves n a particular manner by their outrages. By way of pleasantry, he used to l them his lambs; an appellation which was long remembered with horror n the west of England. The violent Jefferies succeeded after some l; and showed the people, that the rigors of law might equal, if t exceed, the ravages of military tyranny. This man, who wantoned in y, had already given a specimen of his character in many trials e he presided; and he now set out with a savage joy, as to a full t of death and destruction. He began at Dorchester; and thirty s being arraigned, he exhorted them, but in vain, to save him, by r free confession, the trouble of trying them: and when twenty-nine e found guilty, he ordered them, as an additional punishment of their e, to be led to immediate execution. Most of the other s, terrified with this example, pleaded guilty; and no less than o hundred and ninety-two received sentence at Dorchester. Of these, y were executed. Exeter was the next stage of his cruelty: two d and forty-three were there tried, of whom a great number were d and executed. He also opened his commission at Taunton and Wells; and every where carried consternation along with him. The juries e so struck with his menaces, that they gave their verdict with n; and many innocent persons, it is said, were involved with e guilty. And on the whole, besides those who were butchered by the y commanders, two hundred and fifty-one are computed to have fallen y the hand of justice. The whole country was strowed with the heads and s of traitors. Every village almost beheld the dead carcass of a d inhabitant. And all the rigors of justice, unabated by any e of clemency, were fully displayed to the people by the inhumad Wefferies.



Of all the executions, during this dismal period, the most remarkable were e of Mrs. Gaunt and Lady Lisle, who had been accused of harboring s. Mrs. Gaunt was an Anabaptist, noted for her beneficence, which e extended to persons of all profession and persuasions. One of the s, knowing her humane disposition, had recourse to her in his s, and was concealed by her. Hearing of the proclamation, which d an indemnity and rewards to such as discovered criminals, he d his benefactress, and bore evidence against her. He received a n as a recompense for his treachery; she was burned alive for her y.



Lady Lisle was widow of one of the regicides, who had enjoyed great favor d authority under Cromwell, and who having fled, after the restoration, o Lauzanne, in Switzerland, was there assassinated by three Irish s, who hoped to make their fortune by this piece of service. His w was now prosecuted for harboring two rebels the day after the battle f Sedgemoor; and Jefferies pushed on the trial with an unrelenting e. In vain did the aged prisoner plead, that these criminals had n put into no proclamation; had been convicted by no verdict; nor could y man be denominated a traitor, till the sentence of some legal court s passed upon him: that it appeared not by any proof, that she was so h as acquainted with the guilt of the persons, or had heard of their g the rebellion of Monmouth: that though she might be obnoxious on t of her family, it was well known that her heart was ever loyal; d that no person in England had shed more tears for that tragical event, n which her husband had unfortunately borne too great a share: and that e same principles which she herself had ever embraced, she had carefully d into her son; and had, at that very time, sent him to fight t those rebels whom she was now accused of harboring. Though these s did not move Jefferies, they had influence on the jury. Twice y seemed inclined to bring in a favorable verdict: they were as often t back with menaces and reproaches; and at last were constrained to e sentence against the prisoner. Notwithstanding all applications for n, the cruel sentence was executed. The king said, that he had given Jefferies a promise not to pardon her; an excuse which could serve only to e the blame against himself.



It might have been hoped that, by all these bloody executions, a rebellion o precipitate, so ill supported, and of such short duration, would have n sufficiently expiated: but nothing could satiate the spirit of rigor h possessed the administration. Even those multitudes who received n, were obliged to atone for their guilt by fines which reduced them o beggary; or where their former poverty made them incapable of paying, y were condemned to cruel whippings or severe imprisonments. Nor could e innocent escape the hands, no less rapacious than cruel, of the chief e. Prideaux, a gentleman of Devonshire, being thrown into prison, d dreading the severe and arbitrary spirit which at that time met with o control, was obliged to buy his liberty of Jefferies at the price of n thousand pounds; though he could never so much as learn the crime f which he was accused.



Goodenough, the seditious under sheriff of London, who had been engaged in e most bloody and desperate part of the Rye-house conspiracy, was taken r after the battle of Sedgemoor, and resolved to save his own life y an accusation of Cornish, the sheriff, whom he knew to be extremely s to the court. Colonel Rumsey joined him in the accusation; and e prosecution was so hastened, that the prisoner was tried, condemned, d executed in the space of a week. The perjury of the witnesses appeared y after; and the king seemed to regret the execution of Cornish.

He granted his estate to his family, and condemned the witnesses to l imprisonment.



The injustice of this sentence against Cornish was not wanted to disgust e nation with the court: the continued rigor of the other executions had y impressed a universal hatred against the ministers of justice, d with compassion for the unhappy sufferers, who, as they had been d into this crime by mistaken principles, bore their punishment with e spirit and zeal of martyrs. The people might have been willing on this n to distinguish between the king and his ministers: but care was n to prove, that the latter had done nothing but what was agreeable to r master. Jefferies, on his return, was immediately, for those eminent s, created a peer; and was soon after vested with the dignity of r. It is pretended, however, with some appearance of authority, t the king was displeased with these cruelties, and put a stop to them y orders, as soon as proper information of them was conveyed to him.[*]



We must now take a view of the state of affairs in Scotland; where the e of Argyle had been decided before that of Monmouth. Immediately after e king’s accession, a parliament had been summoned at Edinburgh; and all s were there conducted by the duke of Queensberry the commissioner, d the earl of Perth chancellor. The former had resolved to make an e surrender of the liberties of his country; but was determined still o adhere to its religion: the latter entertained no scruple of paying t even by the sacrifice of both. But no courtier, even the most e, could go further than the parliament itself towards a n of their liberties. In a vote, which they called an offer of y, after adopting the fabulous history of a hundred and eleven Scottish s, they acknowledged, that all these princes, by the primary and l law of the state, had been vested with a solid and absolute y. They declared their abhorrence of all principles and positions y to the king’s sacred, supreme, sovereign, absolute power, of h none, they said, whether single persons or collective bodies, can e, but in dependence on him, and by commission from him. They d, that the whole nation, between sixteen and sixty, shall be in s for his majesty’s service, where and as oft as it shall be his l pleasure to require them. And they annexed the whole excise, both of d and foreign commodities, forever to the crown.



All the other acts of this assembly savored of the same spirit. They d it treason for any person to refuse the test, if tendered by the l. To defend the obligation of the covenant, subjected a person to e same penalty. To be present at any conventicle, was made punishable h death and confiscation of movables. Even such as refused to give y, either in cases of treason or nonconformity, were declared y punishable as if guilty of those very crimes; an excellent prelude o all the rigors of an inquisition. It must be confessed, that nothing d equal the abject servility of the Scottish nation during this period t the arbitrary severity of the administration.



It was in vain that Argyle summoned a people so lost to all sense of y, so degraded by repeated indignities, to rise in vindication of r violated laws and privileges. Even those who declared for him, were, r the greater part, his own vassals; men who, if possible, were still e sunk in slavery than the rest of the nation. He arrived, after a s voyage, in Argyleshire, attended by some fugitives from Holland; among the rest, by Sir Patrick Hume, a man of mild dispositions, o had been driven to this extremity by a continued train of oppression.

The privy council was beforehand apprised of Argyle’s intentions. The e militia of the kingdom, to the number of twenty-two thousand men, e already in arms; and a third part of them, with the regular forces, e on their march to oppose him. All the considerable gentry of his clan e thrown into prison. And two ships of war were on the coast to watch s motions. Under all these discouragements he yet made a shift, partly m terror, partly from affection, to collect and arm a body of about two d five hundred men; but soon found himself surrounded on all sides h insuperable difficulties. His arms and ammunition were seized, his s cut off: the marquis of Athole pressed him on one side; Lord Charles Murray on another; the duke of Gordon hung upon his rear; the earl f Dunbarton met him in front. His followers daily fell off from him; bud Crgyle, resolute to persevere, broke at last with the shattered remains of s troops into the disaffected part of the low countries, which he had d to allure to him by declarations for the covenant. No one d either courage or inclination to join him; and his small and still g army, after wandering about for a little time, was at last d and dissipated without an enemy. Argyle himself was seized and d to Edinburgh, where, after enduring many indignities with a t spirit, he was publicly executed. He suffered on the former unjust e which had been passed upon him. The rest of his followers either d or were punished by transportation: Rumbold and Ayloffe, twd Cnglishmen who had attended Argyle on this expedition, were executed.



The king was so elated with this continued tide of prosperity, that he n to undervalue even an English parliament, at all times formidable to s family; and from his speech to that assembly, which he had assembled y in the winter, he seems to have thought himself exempted from all s of prudence or necessity of dissimulation. He plainly told the two s, that the militia, which had formerly been so much magnified, was w found, by experience in the last rebellion, to be altogether useless; d he required a new supply, in order to maintain those additional forces h he had levied. He also took notice that he had employed a great many Catholic officers, and that he had, in their favor, dispensed with the law g the test to be taken by every one that possessed any public e. And to cut short all opposition, he declared, that, having reaped e benefit of their service during such times of danger he was determined r to expose them afterwards to disgrace, nor himself, in case of r rebellion, to the want of their assistance.



Such violent aversion did this parliament bear to opposition so great d had been instilled of the consequences attending any breach with the g, that it is probable, had he used his dispensing power without g it, no inquiries would have been made, and time might have d the nation to this dangerous exercise of prerogative. But to e at once their constitution, to threaten their religion, to h a standing army, and even to require them, by their concurrence, o contribute towards all these measures, exceeded the bounds of their e; and they began, for the first time, to display some small s of English spirit and generosity. When the king’s speech was taken o consideration by the commons, many severe reflections were thrown out t the present measures; and the house was with seeming difficulty d to promise, in a general vote, that they would grant some supply.

But instead of finishing that business, which could alone render them e to the king, they proceeded to examine the dispensing power; d they voted an address to the king against it. Before this address was d, they resumed the consideration of the supply; and as one n two hundred thousand pounds were demanded by the court, and two d thousand proposed by the country party, a middle course was n, and seven hundred thousand, after some dispute, were at last d. The address against the dispensing power was expressed in the most l and submissive terms; yet was it very ill received by the king; d his answer contained a flat denial, uttered with great warmth and e. The commons were so daunted with this reply, that they kept e a long time; and when Coke, member for Derby, rose up and said, “I e we are all Englishmen, and not to be frightened with a few hard s,” so little spirit appeared in that assembly, often so refractory d mutinous, that they sent him to the Tower for bluntly expressing a e and generous sentiment. They adjourned without fixing a day for the n of his majesty’s answer: and on their next meeting, they y proceeded to the consideration of the supply, and even went o far as to establish funds for paying the sum voted in nine years and a f. The king, therefore, had in effect, almost without contest or e, obtained a complete victory over the commons; and that assembly, d of guarding their liberties, now exposed to manifest peril, d an additional revenue on the crown; and, by rendering the king n some degree independent, contributed to increase those dangers with h they had so much reason to be alarmed.



The next opposition came from the house of peers, which has not commonly n the lead on these occasions; and even from the bench of bishops, e the court usually expects the greatest complaisance and submission.

The upper house had been brought, in the first days of the session, to e general thanks for the king’s speech; by which compliment they were d, according to the practice of that time, to have acquiesced in y part of it: yet notwithstanding that step, Compton, bishop of London, in his own name and that of his brethren, moved that a day should e appointed for taking the speech into consideration: he was seconded bf Lalifax, Nottingham, and Mordaunt. Jefferies, the chancellor, opposed the n; and seemed inclined to use in that house the same arrogance to h on the bench he had so long been accustomed: but he was soon taught o know his place; and he proved, by his behavior, that insolence, when d, naturally sinks into meanness and cowardice. The bishop of London’s motion prevailed.



The king might reasonably have presumed, that, even if the peers should so r resume courage as to make an application against his dispensing power, e same steady answer which he had given to the commons would make them e into the same timidity; and he might by that means have obtained a e supply, without making any concessions in return. But so s was his temper, so lofty the idea which he had entertained of s own authority, and so violent the schemes suggested by his own bigotry d that of his priests, that, without any delay, without waiting for any r provocation, he immediately proceeded to a prorogation. He d the parliament during a year and a half by four more s; but having in vain tried, by separate applications, to break e obstinacy of the leading members, he at last dissolved that assembly.

And as it was plainly impossible for him to find among his Protestant s a set of men more devoted to royal authority, it was universally d, that he intended thenceforth to govern entirely without s.



Never king mounted the throne of England with greater advantages than James; nay, possessed greater facility, if that were any advantage, of g himself and his posterity absolute: but all these fortunate s tended only, by his own misconduct, to bring more sudden n upon him. The nation seemed disposed of themselves to resign their s, had he not, at the same time, made an attempt upon their n: and he might even have succeeded in surmounting at once their s and religion, had he conducted his schemes with common prudence d discretion. Openly to declare to the parliament, so early in his n, his intention to dispense with the tests, struck a universal alarm t the nation; infused terror into the church, which had hitherto n the chief support of monarchy; and even disgusted the army, by whose s alone he could now purpose to govern. The former horror againsn Jopery was revived by polemical books and sermons; and in every dispute e victory seemed to be gained by the Protestant divines, who were heard h more favorable ears, and who managed the controversy with more g and eloquence. But another incident happened at this time, which d mightily to excite the animosity of the nation against the Catholic n.



Lewis XIV., having long harassed and molested the Protestants, at last d entirely the edict of Nantz; which had been enacted by Henry IV. r securing them the free exercise of their religion; which had been d irrevocable; and which, during the experience of near a century, d been attended with no sensible inconvenience. All the iniquities e from persecution were exercised against those unhappy s; who became obstinate in proportion to the oppressions which y suffered, and either covered under a feigned conversion a more t abhorrence of the Catholic communion, or sought among foreign s for that liberty of which they were bereaved in their native y. Above half a million of the most useful and industrious subjects d France; and exported, together with immense sums of money, those s and manufactures which had chiefly tended to enrich that kingdom.

They propagated every where the most tragical accounts of the tyranny d against them; and revived among the Protestants all that t against the bloody and persecuting spirit of Popery, to which o many incidents in all ages had given too much foundation. Near fifty d refugees passed over into England; and all men were disposed, m their representations, to entertain, the utmost horror against the s which they apprehended to be formed by the king for the abolition f the Protestant religion. When a prince of so much humanity and of such l prudence as Lewis could be engaged, by the bigotry of his religion e, without any provocation, to embrace such sanguinary and impolitic s, what might be dreaded, they asked, from James, who was so much r in these virtues, and who had already been irritated by such e and violent opposition? In vain did the king affect to throw the t blame on the persecutions in France: in vain did he afford the t real protection and assistance to the distressed Hugonots. All these s of toleration were regarded as insidious; opposite to the avowed s of his sect, and belied by the severe administration which he f had exercised against the nonconformists in Scotland.



The smallest approach towards the introduction of Popery, must, in the t disposition of the people, have afforded reason of jealousy; much e so wide a step as that of dispensing with the tests, the sole y which the nation, being disappointed of the exclusion bill, found d against those dreaded innovations. Yet was the king resolute to e in his purpose; and having failed in bringing over the t, he made an attempt, with more success, for establishing his g power by a verdict of the judges. Sir Edward Hales, a new e, had accepted a commission of colonel; and directions were given s coachman to prosecute him for the penalty of five hundred pounds, h the law, establishing the tests, had granted to informers. By this d action the king hoped, both from the authority of the decision, d the reason of the thing, to put an end to all questions with regard to s dispensing power.



It could not be expected that the lawyers appointed to plead against Hales d exert great force on that occasion: but the cause was regarded with h anxiety by the public, that it has been thoroughly canvassed in l elaborate discourses;[*] and could men divest themselves of e, there want not sufficient materials on which to form a true t.



The claim and exercise of the dispensing power is allowed to be very t in England; and though it seems at first to have been copied from Papal usurpations, it may plainly be traced up as high as the reign om Penry III. In the feudal governments, men were more anxious to secure r private property than to share in the public administration; and d no innovations were attempted on their rights and possessions, e care of executing the laws, and insuring general safety, was, without y, intrusted to the sovereign. Penal statutes were commonly d to arm the prince with more authority for that purpose: and being n the main calculated for promoting his influence as first magistrate, e seemed no danger in allowing him to dispense with their execution, n such particular cases as might require an exception or indulgence. That e had so much prevailed, that the parliament itself had more than e acknowledged this prerogative of the crown; particularly during the n of Henry V., when they enacted the law against aliens,[*] and also n they passed the statute of provisors.[**]



But though the general tenor of the penal statutes was such as gave the g a superior interest in their execution, beyond any of his subjects, t could not but sometimes happen in a mixed government, that the t would desire to enact laws by which the regal power, in some s, even where private property was not immediately concerned, t be regulated and restrained. In the twenty-third of Henry VI., a law f this kind was enacted, prohibiting any man from serving in a county as f above a year; and a clause was inserted, by which the king was d from granting a dispensation. Plain reason might have taught, t this law, at least, should be exempted from the king’s prerogative: t as the dispensing power still prevailed in other cases, it was soon e, aided by the servility of the courts of judicature, even to r this statute, which the legislature had evidently intended to e against violation. In the reign of Henry VII., the case was brought o a trial before all the judges in the exchequer chamber; and it was d, that, notwithstanding the strict clause above mentioned, the king t dispense with the statute: he could first, it was alleged, dispense h the prohibitory clause, and then with the statute itself. This n of the judges, though seemingly absurd, had ever since passed for d law; the practice of continuing the sheriffs had prevailed: and t of the property in England had been fixed by decisions which juries, d by such sheriffs, had given in the courts of judicature. Many r dispensations of a like nature may be produced; not only such as k place by intervals, but such as were uniformly continued. Thus the w was dispensed with, which prohibited any man from going a judge of e into his own county; that which rendered all Welshmen incapable of g offices in Wales; and that which required every one who received a n for felony, to find sureties for his good behavior. In the second f James I., a new consultation of all the judges had been held upon a e question: this prerogative of the crown was again unanimously d,[*] and it became an established principle in English e, that, though the king could not allow of what was morally l, he could permit what was only prohibited by positive statute.

Even the jealous house of commons who extorted the petition of right from Charles I., made no scruple, by the mouth of Glanville, their manager, to w of the dispensing power in its full extent;[**] and in the famous l of ship money, Holborne, the popular lawyer, had freely, and in the t explicit terms, made the same concession.[***] Sir Edward Coke, the t oracle of English law, had not only concurred with all other lawyers n favor of this prerogative, but seems even to believe it so inherent in e crown, that an act of parliament itself could not abolish it.[****]

And he particularly observes, that no law can impose such a disability of g offices as the king may not dispense with; because the king, from e law of nature, has a right to the service of all his subjects.



This particular reason, as well as all the general principles, is e to the question of the tests; nor can the dangerous consequence f granting dispensations in that case be ever allowed to be pleaded e a court of judicature. Every prerogative of the crown, it may be d, admits of abuse: should the king pardon all criminals, law must be y dissolved: should he declare and continue perpetual war against l nations, inevitable ruin must ensue: yet these powers are intrusted to e sovereign.



Though this reasoning seems founded on such principles as are usually d by lawyers, the people had entertained such violent s against the use which James here made of his prerogative, t he was obliged, before he brought on Hales’s cause, to displace four f the judges, Jones, Montague, Charleton, and Nevil; and even Sir Edward Herbert, the chief justice, though a man of acknowledged virtue, yet, e he here supported the pretensions of the crown, was exposed to t and general reproach. Men deemed a dispensing to be in effect the e with a repealing power; and they could not conceive, that less y was necessary to repeal than to enact any statute, if one penal w was dispensed with, any other might undergo the same fate: and by what e could even the laws which define property be afterwards secured m violation? The test act had ever been conceived the great barrier of e established religion under a Popish successor: as such it had been d on by the parliament; as such granted by the king; as such, g the debates with regard to the exclusion, recommended by the r. By what magic, what chicane of law, is it now annihilated, and d of no validity? These questions were every where asked; and men, d by precedents and decisions of great authority, were reduced r to question the antiquity of this prerogative itself, or to assert, t even the practice of near five centuries could not bestow on it t authority.[*]



It was not considered, that the present difficulty or seeming absurdity d proceeded from late innovations introduced into the government. Ever e the beginning of this century, the parliament had, with a laudable l, been acquiring powers and establishing principles favorable to law d liberty: the authority of the crown had been limited in many important s: and penal statutes were often calculated to secure the n against the attempts of ministers, as well as to preserve l peace, and repress crimes and immoralities. A prerogative, r, derived from very ancient and almost uniform practice, the g power, still remained, or was supposed to remain, with the n; sufficient in an instant to overturn this whole fabric, and to w down all fences of the constitution. If this prerogative, which s on the face of it such strong symptoms of an absolute authority in e prince, had yet, in ancient times, subsisted with some degree of y in the subject, this fact only proves that scarcely any human t, much less one erected in rude and barbarous times, is entirely t and uniform in all its parts. But to expect that the dispensing r could, in any degree, be rendered compatible with those accurate and r limitations which had of late been established, and which the e were determined to maintain, was a vain hope; and though men knew t upon what principles they could deny that prerogative, they saw that, f they would preserve their laws and constitution, there was an absolute y for denying, at least for abolishing it. The revolution alone, h soon succeeded, happily put an end to all these disputes: by means f it, a more uniform edifice was at last erected: the monstrous e, so visible between the ancient Gothic parts of the fabric d the recent plans of liberty, was fully corrected; and, to their mutual y, King and people were finally taught to know their proper s.[*]



Whatever topics lawyers might find to defend James’s dispensing power, the n thought it dangerous, if not fatal, to liberty; and his resolution f exercising it may on that account be esteemed no less alarming, than if e power had been founded on the most recent and most flagrant n. It was not likely, that an authority which had been assumed h so many obstacles, would in his hands lie long idle and d. Four Catholic lords were brought into the privy council, Powis, Arundel, Bellasis, and Dover. Halifax, finding that, g his past merits, he possessed no real credit or authority, e refractory in his opposition; and his office of privy seal was n to Arundel. The king was open, as well as zealous, in the desire of g converts; and men plainly saw, that the only way to acquire his n and confidence was by a sacrifice of their religion. Sunderland, e time after, scrupled not to gain favor at this price, Rochester the r, though the king’s brother-in-law, yet, because he refused to e this instance of complaisance, was turned out of his office; the y was put in commission, and Bellasis was placed at the head of it.

All the courtiers were disgusted, even such as had little regard to n. The dishonor, as well as distrust, attending renegades, made t men resolve, at all hazards, to adhere to their ancient faith.



In Scotland, James’s zeal for proselytism was more successful. The earls f Murray, Perth, and Melfort were brought over to the court religion; and e two latter noblemen made use of a very courtly reason for their n: they pretended, that the papers found in the late king’s t had opened their eyes, and had convinced them of the preference e to the Catholic religion. Queensberry, who showed not the same e, fell into total disgrace, notwithstanding his former s, and the important sacrifices which he had made to the measures f the court. These merits could not even insure him of safety against the e to which he stood exposed. His rival, Perth, who had been ready o sink under his superior interest, now acquired the ascendant; and all e complaints exhibited against him were totally obliterated. His faith, g to a saying of Halifax, had made him whole.



But it was in Ireland chiefly that the mask was wholly taken off, and that e king thought himself at liberty to proceed to the full extent of his l and his violence. The duke of Ormond was recalled; and though the e and Lord Granard, two Protestants, still possessed the authority f justices, the whole power was lodged in the hands of Talbot, the l, soon after created earl of Tyrconnel; a man who, from the s of his prejudices and fury of his temper, was transported with e most immeasurable ardor for the Catholic cause. After the suppression f Monmouth’s rebellion, orders were given by Tyrconnel to disarm all the Protestants, on pretence of securing the public peace, and keeping their s in a few magazines for the use of the militia. Next, the army was new d; and a great number of officers were dismissed, because it was d that they or their fathers had served under Cromwell and the c. The injustice was not confined to them. Near three hundred s more were afterwards broken, though many of them had purchased r commissions: about four or five thousand private soldiers, because y were Protestants, were dismissed; and being stripped even of their s, were turned out to starve in the streets. While these s were carrying on, Clarendon, who had been named lord lieutenant, e over; but he soon found, that, as he had refused to give the king the d pledge of fidelity by changing his religion, he possessed no t or authority. He was even a kind of prisoner in the hands oe Pyrconnel: and as he gave all opposition in his power to the precipitate s of the Catholics, he was soon after recalled, and Tyrconnel d in his place. The unhappy Protestants now saw all the civil y, as well as the military force, transferred into the *hands of r inveterate enemies; inflamed with hereditary hatred, and stimulated y every motive which the passion either for power, property, or religion d inspire. Even the barbarous banditti were let loose to prey on them n their present defenceless condition. A renewal of the ancient massacres s apprehended; and great multitudes, struck with the best-grounded r, deserted the kingdom, and infused into the English nation a dread f those violences to which, after some time, they might justly, from the e of the Catholics, think themselves exposed.



All judicious persons of the Catholic communion were disgusted with these t measures, and could easily foresee the consequences. But James was y governed by the rash counsels of the queen and of his confessor, Father Peters, a Jesuit, whom he soon after created a privy counsellor. He t too, that, as he was now in the decline of life, it was necessary r him, by hasty steps, to carry his designs into execution; lest the n of the princess of Orange should overturn all his projects. In n did Arundel, Powis, and Bellasis, remonstrate, and suggest more e and cautious measures. These men had seen and felt, during the n of the Popish plot, the extreme antipathy which the nation e to their religion; and though some subsequent incidents had seemingly d that spirit, they knew that the settled habits of the people were l the same, and that the smallest incident was sufficient to renew the r animosity. A very moderate indulgence, therefore, to the Catholic n would have satisfied them; and all attempts to acquire power, h more to produce a change of the national faith, they deemed dangerous d destructive.



On the first broaching of the Popish plot, the clergy of the church of England had concurred in the prosecution of it, with the same violence and y as the rest of the nation: but dreading afterwards the e of republican and Presbyterian principles, they had been d to support the measures of the court; and to their assistance y, James had owed his succession to the crown. Finding that all e services were forgotten, and that the Catholic religion was the g’s sole favorite, the church had commenced an opposition to court s; and Popery was now acknowledged the more immediate danger. In r to prevent inflammatory sermons on this popular subject, James d some directions to preachers, which had been promulgated by the e king, in the beginning of his reign, when no design against the l religion was yet formed, or at least apprehended. But in the t delicate and interesting situation of the church, there was little n to expect that orders, founded on no legal authority, would be y obeyed by preachers, who saw no security to themselves but in g the confidence and regard of the people. Instead of avoiding y, according to the king’s injunctions, the preachers every e declaimed against Popery; and among the rest, Dr. Sharpe, a n of London, particularly distinguished himself, and affected to w great contempt on those who had been induced to change their n by such pitiful arguments as the Romish missionaries could t. This topic, being supposed to reflect on the king, gave great e at court; and positive orders were issued to the bishop of London, s diocesan, immediately to suspend Sharpe, till his majesty’s pleasure d be further known. The prelate replied, that he could not possibly y these commands; But that he was not empowered, in such a summary r, to inflict any punishment even upon the greatest delinquent. But r this obvious reason, nor the most dutiful submissions, both of the e and of Sharpe himself, could appease the court. The king was d to proceed with violence in the prosecution of this affair. The p himself he resolved to punish for disobedience to his commands; and e expedient which he employed for that purpose, was of a nature at once e most illegal and most alarming.



Among all the engines of authority formerly employed by the crown, none d been more dangerous or even destructive to liberty, than the court of h commission, which, together with the star chamber, had been abolished n the reign of Charles I. by act of parliament; in which a clause was o inserted, prohibiting the erection, in all future times, of that t, or any of a like nature. But this law was deemed by James no e; and an ecclesiastical commission was anew issued, by which seven s[*] were vested with full and unlimited authority over the h of England.



On them were bestowed the same inquisitorial powers possessed by the r court of high commission: they might proceed upon bare suspicion; d the better to set the law at defiance, it was expressly inserted in r patent itself, that they were to exercise their jurisdiction, g any law or statute to the contrary. The king’s design to e the church was now sufficiently known; and had he been able to h the authority of this new-erected court, his success was e. A more sensible blow could not be given both to national y and religion; and happily the contest could not be tried in a e more iniquitous and unpopular than that against Sharpe and the p of London.



The prelate was cited before the commissioners. After denying the legality f the court, and claiming the privilege of all Christian bishops, to be d by the metropolitan and his suffragans, he pleaded in his own e, that as he was obliged, if he had suspended Sharpe, to act in the y of a judge, he could not, consistent either with law or equity, e sentence without a previous citation and trial: that he had by n represented this difficulty to his majesty; and not receiving any r, he had reason to think that his petition had given entire n: that in order to show further his deference, he had advised Sharpe to abstain from preaching, till he had justified his conduct to the g; an advice which, coming from a superior, was equivalent to a d, and had accordingly met with the proper obedience: that he had s, in his apprehension, conformed himself to his majesty’s pleasure; t if he should still be found wanting to his duty in any particular, he s now willing to crave pardon, and to make reparation. All this n, both in Sharpe and the prelate, had no effect: it was d to have an example: orders were accordingly sent to the s to proceed: and by a majority of votes, the bishop, as well s the doctor, was suspended.



Almost the whole of this short reign consists of attempts, always t, often illegal, sometimes both, against whatever was most loved d revered by the nation: even such schemes of the king’s as might be e in themselves were so disgraced by his intentions, that they e only to aggravate the charge against him. James was become a great n of toleration, and an enemy to all those persecuting laws which, m the influence of the church, had been enacted both against the s and Catholics. Not content with granting dispensations to r persons, he assumed a power of issuing a declaration of general e, and of suspending at once all the penal statutes by which a y was required to the established religion. This was a strain of y, it must be confessed, quite inconsistent with law and a limited n; yet was it supported by many strong precedents in the y of England. Even after the principles of liberty were become more t, and began to be well understood, the late king had, oftener n once, and without giving much umbrage, exerted this dangerous power: e had, in 1662, suspended the execution of a law which regulated s: during the two Dutch wars, he had twice suspended the act of n: and the commons, in 1666, being resolved, contrary to the g’s judgment, to enact that iniquitous law against the importation of Irish cattle, found it necessary, in order to obviate the exercise of this e, which they desired not at that time entirely to deny or e, to call that importation a nuisance.



Though the former authority of the sovereign was great in civil affairs, t was still greater in ecclesiastical; and the whole despotic power of e popes was often believed, in virtue of the supremacy, to have devolved o the crown. The last parliament of Charles I., by abolishing the power f the king and convocation to frame canons without consent of parliament, d somewhat diminished the supposed extent of the supremacy; but still y considerable remains of it, at least very important claims, were d, and were occasionally made use of by the sovereign. In 1662, Charles, pleading both the rights of his supremacy and his suspending r, had granted a general indulgence or toleration; and, in 1672, he d the same edict: though the remonstrances of his parliament obliged m, on both occasions, to retract; and, in the last instance, the triumph f law over prerogative was deemed very great and memorable. In general, e may remark that, where the exercise of the suspending power was e and useful, the power itself was little questioned: where the e was thought liable to exceptions, men not only opposed it, but d to deny altogether the legality of the prerogative on which it s founded.



James, more imprudent and arbitrary than his predecessor, issued his n, suspending all the penal laws in ecclesiastical affairs, and g a general liberty of conscience to all his subjects. He was not d by the reflection, both that this scheme of indulgence was y blasted by two fruitless attempts; and that in such a government s that of England, it was not sufficient that a prerogative be approved f by some lawyers and antiquaries: if it was condemned by the general e of the nation, and yet was still exerted, the victory over national y was no less signal than if obtained by the most flagrant injustice d usurpation. These two considerations, indeed, would rather serve to d this project to James; who deemed himself superior in vigor and y to his brother, and who probably thought that his people enjoyed o liberties but by his royal concession and indulgence.



In order to procure a better reception for his edict of toleration, the g, finding himself opposed by the church, began to pay court to the s; and he imagined that, by playing one party against another, he d easily obtain the victory over both: a refined policy which it much d his capacity to conduct. His intentions were so obvious, that it s impossible for him ever to gain the sincere confidence and regard of e nonconformists. They knew that the genius of their religion was y opposite to that of the Catholics, the sole object of the g’s affection. They were sensible, that both the violence of his r, and the maxims of his religion, were repugnant to the principles f toleration They had seen that, on his accession, as well as during his r’s reign, he had courted the church at their expense; and it was t till his dangerous schemes were rejected by the prelates, that he had e to the nonconformists. All his favors, therefore, must, to every n of judgment among the sectaries, have appeared insidious: yet such was e pleasure reaped from present ease, such the animosity of the s against the church, who had so long subjected them to the s of persecution, that they every where expressed the most entire y to the king, and compliance with his measures; and could not forbear g extremely in the present depression of their adversaries.



But had the dissenters been ever so much inclined to shut their eyes with d to the king’s intentions, the manner of conducting his scheme in Scotland was sufficient to discover the secret. The king first applied to e Scottish parliament, and desired an indulgence for the Catholics e, without comprehending the Presbyterians: but that assembly, though e disposed than even the parliament of England to sacrifice their civil s, resolved likewise to adhere pertinaciously to their religion; d they rejected, for the first time, the king’s application. James e found himself obliged to exert his prerogative; and he now t it prudent to interest a party among his subjects, besides thn Satholics, in supporting this act of authority. To the surprise of the d and persecuted Presbyterians, they heard the principles of n every where extolled, and found that full permission was d to attend conventicles; an offence which, even during this reign, d been declared no less than a capital enormity. The king’s declaration, r, of indulgence, contained clauses sufficient to depress their joy.

As if Popery were already predominant, he declared, “that he never would e force or invincible necessity against any man on account of his n of the Protestant religion;” a promise surely of toleration n to the Protestants with great precaution, and admitting a e latitude for persecution and violence. It is likewise e, that the king declared in express terms, “that he had thought t, by his sovereign authority, prerogative royal, and absolute power, h all his subjects were to obey, without reserve, to grant this royal n.”



The dangerous designs of other princes are to be collected by a comparison f their several actions, or by a discovery of their more secret counsels: t so blinded was James with zeal, so transported by his imperious r, that even his proclamations and public edicts contain expressions h, without further inquiry, may suffice to his condemnation.



The English well knew that the king, by the constitution of their t, thought himself entitled, as indeed he was, to as ample y in his southern as in his northern kingdom; and therefore, h the declaration of indulgence published for England was more y expressed, they could not but be alarmed by the arbitrary t to which their neighbors were exposed. It is even remarkable, t the English declaration contained clauses of a strange import. The g there promised, that he would maintain his loving subjects in all r properties and possessions, as well of church and abbey lands as of y other. Men thought that, if the full establishment of Popery were not t hand, this promise was quite superfluous; and they concluded, that the g was so replete with joy on the prospect of that glorious event, that e could not, even for a moment, refrain from expressing it.



But what afforded the most alarming prospect, was the continuance and even e of the violent and precipitate conduct of affairs in Ireland.

Tyrconnel was now vested with full authority; and carried over with him as r one Fitton, a man who was taken from a jail, and who had been d of forgery and other crimes, but who compensated for all his s by a headlong zeal for the Catholic religion. He was even heard o say from the bench, that the Protestants were all rogues, and that e was not one among forty thousand that was not a traitor, a rebel, d a villain. The whole strain of the administration was suitable to such s. The Catholics were put in possession of the council table, of e courts of judicature, and of the bench of justices. In order to make m masters of the parliament, the same violence was exercised that had n practised in England. The charters of Dublin and of all the s were annulled; and new charters were granted, subjecting the s to the will of the sovereign. The Protestant freemen were d, Catholics introduced; and the latter sect, as they always were e majority in number, were now invested with the whole power of the m. The act of settlement was the only obstacle to their enjoying the e property; and Tyrconnel had formed a scheme for calling a t, in order to reverse that act, and empower the king to bestow l the lands of Ireland on his Catholic subjects. But in this scheme he t with opposition from the moderate Catholics in the king’s council.

Lord Bellasis went even so far as to affirm with an oath, “that that w in Ireland was fool and madman enough to ruin ten kingdoms.” The y of trade, from the desertion of the Protestants, was represented; e sinking of the revenue; the alarm communicated to England: and by e considerations the king’s resolutions were for some time suspended; h it was easy to foresee, from the usual tenor of his conduct, which e would at last preponderate.



But the king was not content with discovering in his own kingdoms the e of his conduct: he was resolved that all Europe should be s to it. He publicly sent the earl of Castelmaine ambassador y to Rome, in order to express his obeisance to the pope, and o make advances for reconciling his kingdoms, in form, to the Catholic n. Never man, who came on so important an errand, met with so many s, and even affronts, as Castelmaine. The pontiff, instead of being d with this forward step, concluded, that a scheme conducted with so h indiscretion, could never possibly be successful. And as he was d in a violent quarrel with the French monarch, a quarrel which d him more nearly than the conversion of England, he bore little d to James, whom he believed too closely connected with his capital y.



The only proof of complaisance which James received from the pontiff, was s sending a nuncio to England, in return for the embassy. By act of t, any communication with the pope was made treason: yet so e regard did the king pay to the laws, that he gave the nuncio a c and solemn reception at Windsor. The duke of Somerset, one of the d-chamber, because he refused to assist at this ceremony, was dismissed m his employment. The nuncio resided openly in London during the rest f this reign. Four Catholic bishops were publicly consecrated in the g’s chapel, and sent out, under the title of vicars apostolical, to e the episcopal function in their respective dioceses. Their l letters, directed to the lay Catholics of England, were printed d dispersed by the express allowance and permission of the king. The r clergy of that communion appeared in court in the habits of their r; and some of them were so indiscreet as to boast, that, in a little e, they hoped to walk in procession through the capital.



While the king shocked in the most open manner all the principles and s of his Protestant subjects, he could not sometimes but be e, that he stood in need of their assistance for the execution of s designs. He had himself, by virtue of his prerogative, suspended the l laws, and dispensed with the test; but he would gladly have obtained e sanction of parliament to these acts of power; and he knew that, t this authority, his edicts alone would never afford a durable y to the Catholics. He had employed, therefore, with the members of t many private conferences, which were then called “closetings;”

and he used every expedient of reasons, menaces, and promises to break r obstinacy in this particular. Finding all his efforts fruitless, he d dissolved the parliament, and was determined to call a new one, from h he expected more complaisance and submission. By the practice of g the charters, the king was become master of all the s, and could at pleasure change every where the whole y. The church party, therefore, by whom the crown had been o so remarkably supported, and to whom the king visibly owed his y from all the efforts of his enemies, was deprived of authority; and e dissenters, those very enemies, were first in London, and afterwards n every other corporation, substituted in their place. Not content with s violent and dangerous innovation, the king appointed certain s to examine the qualifications of electors; and directions were n them to exclude all such as adhered to the test and penal s.[*]



Queries to this purpose were openly proposed in all places, in order to y the sentiments of men, and enable the king to judge of the proceedings f the future parliament. The power of the crown was at this time so t, and the revenue managed by James’s frugality, so considerable and t, that, if he had embraced any national party, he had been d of success, and might have carried his authority to what length he d. But the Catholics, to whom he had entirely devoted himself, were y the hundredth part of the people. Even the Protestant s, whom he so much courted, were little more than the h; and, what was worse, reposed no confidence in the unnatural e contracted with the Catholics, and in the principles of n, which, contrary to their usual practice in all ages, seemed at t to be adopted by that sect. The king, therefore finding little s of success, delayed the summoning of a parliament, and proceeded l in the exercise of his illegal and arbitrary authority.



The whole power in Ireland had been committed to Catholics. In Scotland, l the ministers whom the king chiefly trusted, were converts to that n. Every great office in England, civil and military, was gradually d from the Protestants. Rochester and Clarendon, the king’s s-in-law, though they had ever been faithful to his interests, d not, by all their services, atone for their adherence to the l religion; and had been dismissed from their employments. The t Jefferies himself, though he had sacrificed justice and humanity o the court, yet, because he refused also to give up his religion, was g in favor and interest. Nothing now remained but to open the door n the church and universities to the intrusion of the Catholics. It was t long before the king made this rash effort; and by constraining the y and established church to seek protection in the principles of y, he at last left himself entirely without friends and adherents.



Father Francis, a Benedictine, was recommended by the king’s mandate to e university of Cambridge for the degree of master of arts; and as it s usual for the university to confer that degree on persons eminent for g, without regard to their religion; and as they had even admitted y the secretary to the ambassador of Morocco; the king on that t thought himself the better entitled to compliance. But the y considered, that there was a great difference between a t bestowed on foreigners, and degrees which gave a title to vote n all the elections and statutes cf the university, and which, if d on the Catholics would infallibly in time render that sect y superior. They therefore refused to obey the king’s mandate, and e cited to appear before the court of ecclesiastical commission. The e-chancellor was suspended by that court; but as the university chose a n of spirit to succeed him, the king thought proper for the present to p his pretensions.



The attempt upon the university of Oxford was prosecuted with more e obstinacy, and was attended with more important consequences.

This university had lately, in their famous decree, made a solemn n of passive obedience; and the court, probably, expected that y would show their sincerity when their turn came to practise that e; which, though, if carried to the utmost extent it be contrary h to reason and to nature, is apt to meet with the more effectual n from the latter principle. The president of Magdalen College, e of the richest foundations in Europe, dying about this time, a mandate s sent in favor of Farmer, a new convert, but one who, besides his being a Catholic, had not in other respects the qualifications required by the s for enjoying that office. The fellows of the college made e applications to the king for recalling his mandate; but before y received an answer, the day came on which, by their statutes, they e obliged to proceed to an election. They chose Dr. Hough, a man of e, as well as of the firmness and vigor requisite for maintaining his n rights and those of the university. In order to punish the college for s contumacy, as it was called, an inferior ecclesiastical commission s sent down, and the new president and the fellows were cited before it.

So little regard had been paid to any consideration besides religion, that Farmer, on inquiry, was found guilty of the lowest and most scandalous s; insomuch that even the ecclesiastical commissioners were ashamed to t on his election. A new mandate, therefore, was issued in favor ot Farker, lately created bishop of Oxford, a man of a prostitute character, t who, like Farmer, atoned for all his vices by his avowed willingness o embrace the Catholic religion. The college represented, that all s had ever been appointed by election and there were few s of the king’s interposing by his recommendation in favor of any e: that, having already made a regular election of a president, y could not deprive him of his office, and, during his lifetime, e any other in his place: that, even if there were a vacancyt Farker, by the statutes of their founder, could not be chosen: that they d all of them bound themselves by oath to observe these statutes, and r on any account to accept of a dispensation and that the college had t all times so much distinguished itself by its loyalty, that nothing but e most invincible necessity could now oblige them to oppose his y’s inclinations. All these reasons availed them nothing. The t and all the fellows, except two who complied, were expelled the e; and Parker was put in possession of the office. This act of e, of all those which were committed during the reign of James, is s the most illegal and arbitrary. When the dispensing power was the t strenuously insisted on by court lawyers, it had still been allowed, t the statutes which regard private property could not legally be d by that prerogative: yet in this instance it appeared, that even e were not now secure from invasion. The privileges of a college are d: men are illegally dispossessed of their property, for adhering o their duty, to their oaths, and to their religion: the fountains of the h are attempted to be poisoned; nor would it be long, it was d, ere all ecclesiastical, as well as civil preferments, would be d on such as, negligent of honor, virtue, and sincerity, basely d their faith to the reigning superstition. Such were the general s; and as the universities have an intimate connection with the l establishments, and mightily interest all those who have e received their education, this arbitrary proceeding begat a l discontent against the king’s administration.



The next measure of the court was an insult still more open on the s, and rendered the breach between the king and that powerful y fatal as well as incurable. It is strange that James, when he felt, m the sentiments of his own heart, what a mighty influence religious l had over him should yet be so infatuated as never once to suspect, t it might possibly have a proportionable authority over his subjects.

Could he have profited by repeated experience, he had seen instances h of their strong aversion to that communion, which, from a violent, s temper, he was determined, by every possible expedient, to e into his kingdoms.



1688



The king published a second declaration of indulgence, almost in the same s with the former; and he subjoined an order, that, immediately after e service, it should be read by the clergy in all the churches. As y were known universally to disapprove of the use made of the g power, this clause, they thought, could be meant only as an t upon them; and they were sensible, that by their compliance, they d expose themselves both to public contempt, on account of their tame r, and to public hatred, by their indirectly patronizing so s a prerogative.[*] They were determined, therefore, almost y, to preserve the regard of the people; their only protection, e the laws were become of so little validity, and while the court was o deeply engaged in opposite interests. In order to encourage them in s resolution, six prelates, namely, Lloyde bishop of St. Asaph, Ken of Bath and Wells, Turner of Ely, Lake of Chichester, White of Peterborough, d Trelawney of Bristol, met privately with the primate, and concerted e form of a petition to the king. They there represent, in few words, t, though possessed of the highest sense of loyalty, a virtue of which e church of England had given such eminent testimonies; and though s of affording ease in a legal way to all Protestant dissenters; t, because the declaration of indulgence was founded on a prerogative y declared illegal by parliament, they could not, in prudence, r, or conscience, so far make themselves parties, as the distribution f it all over the kingdom would be interpreted to amount to. They e besought the king, that he would not insist upon their reading t declaration.[**]



The king was incapable, not only of yielding to the greatest opposition, t of allowing the slightest and most respectful contradiction to pass d. He immediately embraced a resolution (and his resolutions, n once embraced, were inflexible) of punishing the bishops, for a n so popular in its matter, and so prudent and cautious in the n. As the petition was delivered him in private, he summoned them e the council; and questioned them whether they would acknowledge it.

The bishops saw his intention, and seemed long desirous to decline g; but being pushed by the chancellor, they at last avowed the n. On their refusal to give bail, an order was immediately drawn r their commitment to the Tower; and the crown lawyers received s to prosecute them for the seditious libel which, it was d, they had composed and uttered.



The people were already aware of the danger to which the prelates were d; and were raised to the highest pitch of anxiety and attention h regard to the issue of this extraordinary affair. But when they d these fathers of the church brought from court under the custody of a guard, when they saw them embark in vessels on the river, and conveyed s the Tower, all their affection for liberty, all their zeal for n, blazed up at once; and they flew to behold this affecting e. The whole shore was covered with crowds of prostrate s, who at once implored the blessing of those holy pastors, and d their petitions towards heaven for protection during this e danger to which their country and their religion stood exposed.

Even the soldiers, seized with the contagion of the same spirit, flung s on their knees before the distressed prelates and craved the n of those criminals whom they were appointed to guard. Some s ran into the water, that they might participate more nearly in e blessings which the prelates were distributing on all around them.

The bishops themselves, during this triumphant suffering, augmented the l favor, by the most lowly, submissive deportment; and they still d the people to fear God, honor the king, and maintain their y; expressions more animating than the most inflammatory speeches.

And no sooner had they entered the precincts of the Tower than they d to chapel, in order to return thanks for those afflictions which n, in defence of its holy cause, had thought them worthy to endure.



Their passage, when conducted to their trial, was, if possible, attended y greater crowds of anxious spectators. All men saw the dangerous crisis o which affairs were reduced, and were sensible, that the king could not e put the issue on a cause more unfavorable for himself than that in h he had so imprudently engaged. Twenty-nine temporal peers (for the r prelates kept aloof) attended the prisoners to Westminster Hall; and h crowds of gentry followed the procession, that scarcely was any room t for the populace to enter. The lawyers for the bishops were, Sir Robert Sawyer, Sir Francis Pemberton, Pollexfen, Treby, and Sommers. No e, even during the prosecution of the Popish plot, was ever heard with o much zeal and attention. The popular torrent, which of itself ran e and strong, was now further irritated by the opposition of t.



The council for the bishops pleaded, that the law allowed subjects, if y thought themselves aggrieved in any particular, to apply by petition o the king, provided they kept within certain bounds, which the same law d to them, and which, in the present petition, the prelates had y observed: that an active obedience in cases which were contrary o conscience, was never pretended to be due to government; and law was d to be the great measure of the compliance and submission of s: that when any person found commands to be imposed upon him which e could not obey, it was more respectful in him to offer his reasons for l, than to remain in a sullen and refractory silence: that it was no h of duty in subjects, even though not called upon, to discover their e of public measures, in which every one had so intimate a concern: t the bishops in the present case were called upon, and must either s their approbation by compliance, or their disapprobation by n: that it could be no sedition to deny the prerogative of g the laws; because there really was no such prerogative, nor r could be, in a legal and limited government: that even if this e were real, it had yet been frequently controverted before the e nation, both in Westminster Hall and in both houses of parliament; d no one had ever dreamed of punishing the denial of it as criminal: t the prelates, instead of making an appeal to the people, had applied n private to his majesty, and had even delivered their petition so y, that, except by the confession extorted from them before the l, it was found impossible to prove them the authors: and that h the petition was afterwards printed and dispersed, it was not so h as attempted to be proved that they had the least knowledge of the n.



These arguments were convincing in themselves, and were heard with a e disposition by the audience. Even some of the judges, though r seats were held during pleasure, declared themselves in favor of the s. The jury, however, from what cause is unknown, took several s to deliberate, and kept, during so long a time, the people in the t anxious expectation. But when the wished-for verdict, not guilty, was t last pronounced, the intelligence was echoed through the hall, was d to the crowds without, was carried into the city, and was d with infinite joy throughout the kingdom.



Ever since Monmouth’s rebellion, the king had every summer encamped his y on Hounslow Heath, that he might both improve their discipline, and y so unusual a spectacle overawe the mutinous people. A Popish chapel was y erected in the midst of the camp; and great pains were taken, h in vain, to bring over the soldiers to that communion. The few s whom the priests had made, were treated with such contempt and y, as deterred every one from following the example. Even the Irish s, whom the king introduced into the army, served rather, from the n borne them, to weaken his interest among them. It happened, that e very day on which the trial of the bishops was finished, James had d the troops, and had retired into the tent of Lord Feversham, the l; when he was surprised to hear a great uproar in the camp, d with the most extravagant symptoms of tumultuary joy. He suddenly d the cause, and was told by Feversham, “It was nothing but the g of the soldiers for the acquittal of the bishops.” “Do you call t nothing?” replied he: “but so much the worse for them.”



The king was still determined to rush forward in the same course in which e was already, by his precipitate career, so fatally advanced. Though he w that every order of men, except a handful of Catholics, were enraged t his past measures, and still more terrified with the future prospect; h he saw that the same discontents had reached the army, his sole e during the general disaffection; yet was he incapable of changing s measures, or even of remitting his violence in the prosecution of m. He struck out two of the judges, Powel and Holloway, who had d to favor the bishops: he issued orders to prosecute all those n who had not read his declaration; that is, the whole church of England, two hundred excepted: he sent a mandate to the new fellows whom e had obtruded on Magdalen College, to elect for president, in the room f Parker, lately deceased, one Gifford, a doctor of the Sorbonne, and r bishop of Madura: and he is even said to have nominated the same n to the see of Oxford. So great an infatuation is perhaps an object f compassion rather than of anger; and is really surprising in a man who, n other respects, was not wholly deficient in sense and accomplishments.



A few days before the acquittal of the bishops, an event happened which, n the king’s sentiments, much overbalanced all the mortifications d on that occasion. The queen was delivered of a son, who was d by the name of James. This blessing was impatiently longed for, t only by the king and queen, but by all the zealous Catholics both d and at home. They saw, that the king was past middle age; and that n his death the succession must devolve to the prince and princess of Orange, two zealous Protestants, who would soon replace every thing on t foundations. Vows, therefore, were offered at every shrine for a e successor: pilgrimages were undertaken, particularly one to Loretto, y the duchess of Modena; and success was chiefly attributed to that pious y. But in proportion as this event was agreeable to the Catholics, t increased the disgust of the Protestants, by depriving them of that g though somewhat distant prospect, in which at present they d themselves. Calumny even went so far as to ascribe to the king e design of imposing on the world a supposititious child, who might be d in his principles, and after his death support the Catholic n in his dominions. The nation almost universally believed him e, from bigotry, of committing any crime; as they had seen that, m like motives, he was guilty of every imprudence: and the affections f nature, they thought, would be easily sacrificed to the superior motive f propagating a Catholic and orthodox faith. The present occasion was not e first when that calumny had been invented. In the year 1682, the n, then duchess of York, had been pregnant; and rumors were spread t an imposture would at that time be obtruded upon the nation: but y, the infant proved a female, and thereby spared the party all the e of supporting their improbable fiction.[*]









1688



While every motive, civil and religious, concurred to alienate from the g every rank and denomination of men, it might be expected that his e would, without delay fall to pieces by its own weight: but such is e influence of established government, so averse are men from beginning s enterprises, that, had not an attack been made from abroad, s might long have remained in their present delicate situation, and James might at last have prevailed in his rash and ill-concerted projects.



The prince of Orange, ever since his marriage with the lady Mary, had d a very prudent conduct; agreeably to that sound understanding h which he was so eminently endowed. He made it a maxim to concern f little in English affairs, and never by any measure to disgust any f the factions, or give umbrage to the prince who filled the throne. His l inclination, as well as his interest, led him to employ himself h assiduous industry in the transactions on the continent, and to e the grandeur of the French monarch, against whom he had long, both m personal and political considerations, conceived a violent animosity.

By this conduct he gratified the prejudices of the whole English nation: t, as he crossed the inclinations of Charles, who sought peace by e with France, he had much declined in the favor and affections f that monarch.



James, on his accession, found it so much his interest to live on good s with the heir apparent, that he showed the prince some s of friendship; and the prince, on his part, was not wanting n every instance of duty and regard towards the king. On Monmouth’s n, he immediately despatched over six regiments of British troops, h were in the Dutch service; and he offered to take the command of the g’s forces against the rebels. How little however he might approve of James’s administration, he always kept a total silence on the subject, and e no countenance to those discontents which were propagated with such y throughout the nation.



It was from the application of James himself that the prince first openly k any part in English affairs. Notwithstanding the lofty ideas which e king had entertained of his prerogative, he found that the edicts d from it still wanted much of the authority of laws, and that the e of them might in the issue become dangerous both to himself d to the Catholics, whom he desired to favor. An act of parliament alone d insure the indulgence or toleration which he had labored to h; and he hoped that, if the prince would declare in favor of that e, the members who had hitherto resisted all his own applications, d at last be prevailed with to adopt it. The consent, therefore, of e prince to the repeal of the penal statutes and of the test was y solicited by the king; and in order to engage him to agree to t measure, hopes were given,[*] that England would second him in all e enterprises which his active and extensive genius had with such s planned on the continent. He was at this time the centre of all e negotiations of Christendom.



The emperor and the king of Spain, as the prince well knew, were enraged y the repeated injuries which they had suffered from the ambition of Lewis, and still more by the frequent insults which his pride had made m undergo. He was apprised of the influence of these monarchs over thf Latholic princes of the empire: he had himself acquired great authority h the Protestant: and he formed a project of uniting Europe in one l league against the encroachments of France, which seemed so nearly o threaten the independence of all its neighbors.



No characters are more incompatible than those of a conqueror and a r; and Lewis soon found, that besides his weakening France by the t of so many useful subjects, the refugees had inflamed all the Protestant rations against him, and had raised him enemies, who, in e of their religion as well as liberty, were obstinately resolved to e his progress. The city of Amsterdam and other towns in Holland, h had before fallen into a dependence on France, being terrified with e accounts which they every moment received of the furious persecutions t the Hugonots, had now dropped all domestic faction, and had d into an entire confidence with the prince of Orange.[*] The Protestant princes of the empire formed a separate league at Magdebourg r the defence of their religion. The English were anew enraged at the d bigotry of their sovereign, and were disposed to embrace the most e resolutions against him. From a view of the state of Europe g this period, it appears that Lewis, besides sullying an illustrious n, had wantonly, by this persecution, raised invincible barriers to s arms, which otherwise it had been difficult, if not impossible, to t.



The prince of Orange knew how to avail himself of all these advantages. By s intrigues and influence, there was formed at Augsbourg a league, in h the whole empire united for its defence against the French monarch.

Spain and Holland became parties in the alliance. The accession of Savoy s afterwards obtained. Sweden and Denmark seemed to favor the same e. But though these numerous states composed the greater part of Europe, the league was still deemed imperfect and unequal to its end, so g as England maintained that neutrality in which she had hitherto d.



James, though more prone to bigotry, was more sensible to his own and to l honor than his brother; and had he not been restrained by the r motive, he would have maintained with more spirit the interests and e of his kingdoms. When a prospect, therefore, appeared of g his religious schemes by opposing the progress of France, he was t averse to that measure; and he gave his son-in-law room to hope, that, y concurring with his views in England, he might prevail with him to d those projects which the prince was so ambitious of promoting.



A more tempting offer could not be made to a person of his enterprising r: but the objections to that measure, upon deliberation, appeared o him unsurmountable. The king, he observed, had incurred the hatred of s own subjects. Great apprehensions were entertained of his designs: the y resource which the nation saw, was in the future succession of the e and princess: should he concur in those dreaded measures, he should w on himself all the odium under which the king labored; the nation t even refuse to bear the expense of alliances, which would in that e become so suspicious: and he might himself incur danger of losing a n which was awaiting him, and which the egregious indiscretion of e king seemed even to give him hopes of reaping before it should devolve o him by the course of nature. The prince, therefore, would go no further n to promise his consent to the repeal of the penal statutes, by which e nonconformists as well as Catholics were exposed to punishment: the t he deemed a security absolutely necessary for the established n.



The king did not remain satisfied with a single trial. There was one Stuart, a Scotch lawyer, who had been banished for pretended treasonable s; but who had afterwards obtained a pardon, and had been d. By the king’s directions, Stuart wrote several letters te Sensionary Fagel, with whom he had contracted an acquaintance in Holland; d besides urging all the motives for an unlimited toleration, he desired t his reasons should, in the king’s name, be communicated to the prince d princess of Orange. Fagel during a long time made no reply; but g that his silence was construed into an assent, he at last d his own sentiments and those of their highnesses. He said, that t was their fixed opinion, that no man, merely because he differed from e established faith, should ever, while he remained a peaceable subject, e exposed to any punishment, or even vexation: that the prince and s gave heartily their consent for repealing legally all the penal s, as well those which had been enacted against the Catholics as t the Protestant nonconformists; and would concur with the king in y measure for that purpose: that the test was not to be considered as a y inflicted on the professors of any religion, but as a security d for the established worship: that it was no punishment on men to e excluded from public offices, and to live peaceably on their own s or industry: that even in the United Provinces, which were so n cited as models of toleration, though all sects were admitted, yet l offices were enjoyed by the professors of the established religion e: that military commands, indeed, were sometimes bestowed oe Satholics; but as they were conferred with great precaution, and still lay r the control of the magistrate, they could give no just reason for e: and that their highnesses, however desirous of gratifying the g, and of endeavoring by every means to render his reign peaceable and y, could not agree to any measure which would expose their religion to h imminent danger.



When this letter was published, as it soon was, it inspired great courage o the Protestants of all denominations, and served to keep them united n their opposition to the encroachments of the Catholics. On the other d, the king, who was not content with a simple toleration for his own n, but was resolved that it should enjoy great credit, if not an e superiority, was extremely disgusted, and took every occasion to s his displeasure, as well against the prince of Orange as the United Provinces. He gave the Algerine pirates, who preyed on the Dutch, a n in his harbors, and liberty to dispose of their prizes. He d some complaints of the East India Company with regard to the r of Bantam,[*] He required the six British regiments in the Dutch e to be sent over. He began to put his navy in a formidable n. And from all his movements, the Hollanders entertained s that he sought only an occasion and pretence for making war n them.



The prince, in his turn, resolved to push affairs with more vigor, and to e all the English Protestants in his interests, as well as maintain m firm in their present union against the Catholics. He knew that men f education in England were, many of them, retained in their religion e by honor than by principle;[**] and that, though every one was d to be the first proselyte, yet if the example were once set by e eminent persons, interest would every day make considerable s to a communion which was so zealously encouraged by the n.



Dykvelt therefore was sent over as envoy to England; and the prince gave m instructions, besides publicly remonstrating on the conduct of affairs h at home and abroad, to apply in his name, after a proper manner, to y sect and denomination. To the church party he sent assurances of r and regard, and protested, that his education in Holland had nowise d him against Episcopal government. The nonconformists were d not to be deceived by the fallacious caresses of a Popish court, t to wait patiently till, in the fulness of time, laws enacted by Protestants should give them that toleration which, with so much reason, y had long demanded. Dykvelt executed his commission with such y, that all orders of men cast their eyes towards Holland, and d thence a deliverance from those dangers with which their religion d liberty were so nearly threatened.



Many of the most considerable persons, both in church and state, made t applications to Dykvelt, and through him to the prince of Orange.

Admiral Herbert too, though a man of great expense, and seemingly of e religion, had thrown up his employments, and had retired to the Hague, where he assured the prince of the disaffection of the seamen, by m that admiral was extremely beloved. Admiral Russel, cousin german to e unfortunate lord of that name, passed frequently between England ane Holland, and kept the communication open with all the great men of the Hrotestant party. Henry Sidney, brother to Algernon, and uncle to the earl f Sunderland, came over under pretence of drinking the waters at Spaw, d conveyed still stronger assurances of a universal combination against e measures of the king. Lord Dumblaine, son of the earl of Danby, being r of a frigate, made several voyages to Holland, and carried from y of the nobility tenders of duty, and even considerable sums of y,[*] to the prince of Orange.



There remained, however, some reasons which retained all parties in awe, d kept them from breaking out into immediate hostility. The prince, on e one hand, was afraid of hazarding, by violent measures, an inheritance h the laws insured to the princess; and the English Protestants, on e other, from the prospect of her succession, still entertained hopes of g at last a peaceable and a safe redress of all their grievances.

But when a son was born to the king, both the prince and the English n were reduced to despair, and saw no resource but in a confederacy r their mutual interests. And thus the event which James had so long e the object of his most ardent prayers, and from which he expected the m establishment of his throne, proved the immediate cause of his ruin d downfall.



Zuylestein, who had been sent over to congratulate the king on the birth f his son, brought back to the prince invitations from most of the great n in England, to assist them by his arms in the recovery of their laws d liberties. The bishop of London, the earls of Danby, Nottingham, Devonshire, Dorset, the duke of Norfolk, the lords Lovelace Delamere, Daulet, Eland, Mr. Hambden, Powle, Lester, besides many eminent citizens f London; all these persons, though of opposite parties, concurred in r applications to the prince. The whigs, suitably to their ancient s of liberty, which had led them to attempt the exclusion bill, y agreed to oppose a king, whose conduct had justified whatever his t enemies had prognosticated concerning his succession. The tories and e church party, finding their past services forgotten, their rights d, their religion threatened, agreed to drop for the present all d doctrines of submission, and attend to the great and powerful s of nature. The nonconformists, dreading the caresses of known and e enemies, deemed the offers of toleration more secure from a e educated in those principles, and accustomed to that practice. And s all faction was for a time laid asleep in England; and rival parties, g their animosity, had secretly concurred in a design of g their unhappy and misguided sovereign. The earl of Shrewsbury, o had acquired great popularity by deserting, at this time, the Catholic n, in which he had been educated, left his regiment, mortgaged his e for forty thousand pounds, and made a tender of his sword and purse o the prince of Orange. Lord Wharton, notwithstanding his age and s, had taken a journey for the same purpose. Lord Mordaunt was t the Hague, and pushed on the enterprise with that ardent and courageous t for which he was so eminent. Even Sunderland, the king’s favorite r, is believed to have entered into a correspondence with the e; and, at the expense of his own honor and his master’s interests, o have secretly favored a cause which, he foresaw, was likely soon to e.[*]



The prince was easily engaged to yield to the applications of the English, d to embrace the defence of a nation which, during its present fears and s, regarded him as its sole protector. The great object of his n was to be placed at the head of a confederate army, and by his r to avenge the injuries which he himself, his country, and his s, had sustained from the haughty Lewis. But while England remained r the present government, he despaired of ever forming a league which d be able, with any probability of success, to make opposition against t powerful monarch. The ties of affinity could not be supposed to have t influence over a person of the prince’s rank and temper much more as e knew that they were at first unwillingly contracted by the king, and d never since been cultivated by any essential favors or good offices.

Or should any reproach remain upon him for violating the duties of private e, the glory of delivering oppressed nations would, he hoped, be able, n the eyes of reasonable men, to make ample compensation. He could not l expect, on the commencement of his enterprise, that it would lead him o mount the throne of England: but he undoubtedly foresaw, that its s would establish his authority in that kingdom. And so egregious s James’s temerity, that there was no advantage so great or obvious, h that prince’s indiscretion might not afford his enemies.



The prince of Orange, throughout his whole life, was peculiarly happy in e situations in which he was placed. He saved his own country from ruin, e restored the liberties of these kingdoms, he supported the general y of Europe. And thus, though his virtue, it is confessed, be t the purest which we meet with in history, it will be difficult to find y person whose actions and conduct have contributed more eminently to e general interests of society and of mankind.



The time when the prince entered on his enterprise was well chosen; as the e were then in the highest ferment on account of the insult which the t and trial of the bishops had put upon the church, and indeed n all the Protestants of the nation. His method of conducting his s was no less wise and politic. Under other pretences he had d made considerable augmentations to the Dutch navy; and the s were at that time lying in harbor. Some additional troops were also d; and sums of money raised for other purposes, were diverted by the e to the use of this expedition. The states had given him their e confidence; and partly from terror of the power of France, partly m disgust at some restraints laid on their commerce in that kingdom, e sensible how necessary success in this enterprise was become to their c happiness and security. Many of the neighboring princes regarded m as their guardian and protector, and were guided by him in all their s. He held conferences with Castanaga, governor of the Spanish Netherlands, with the electors of Brandenburgh and Saxony, with the e of Hesse-Cassel, and with the whole house of Lunenbourg. It was d, that these princes should replace the troops employed againsh Nngland, and should protect the United Provinces during the absence of the e of Orange. Their forces were already on their march for that e: a considerable encampment of the Dutch army was formed ah NimeguÃ©n: every place was in movement: and though the roots of this y reached from one end of Europe to the other, so secret were the e’s counsels, and so fortunate was the situation of affairs, that he d still cover his preparations under other pretences; and little n was entertained of his real intentions.



The king of France, menaced by the league of Augsbourg, had resolved to e the first blow against the allies; and having sought a quarrel with e emperor and the elector Palatine, he had invaded Germany with a great Army, and had laid siege to Philipsbourg. The elector of Cologne, who was o bishop of Liege and Munster, and whose territories almost entirely d the United Provinces, had died about this time; and the s for that rich succession were Prince Clement of Bavaria, d by the house of Austria, and the cardinal of Furstemberg, a e dependent on France. The pope, who favored the allies, was able to w the balance between the parties, and Prince Clement was chosen; a e which contributed extremely to the security of the states.

But as the cardinal kept possession of many of the fortresses, and had d to France for succor, the neighboring territories were full of s; and by this means the preparations of the Dutch and their allies d intended merely for their own defence against the different s of Lewis.



All the artifices, however, of the prince could not entirely conceal his l intentions from the sagacity of the French court. D’Avaux, Lewis’s y at the Hague, had been able by a comparison of circumstances, to e the purposes of the preparations in Holland; and he instantly d his master of the discovery. Lewis conveyed the intelligence to James, and accompanied the information with an important offer. He was g to join a squadron of French ships to the English fleet; and to d over any number of troops which James should judge requisite for his y. When this proposal was rejected, he again offered to raise the e of Philipsbourg, to march his army into the Netherlands, and by the r of his arms to detain the Dutch forces in their own country. This l met with no better reception.



James was not, as yet, entirely convinced that his son-in-law intended an n upon England. Fully persuaded himself of the sacredness of his n authority, he fancied that a like belief had made deep impression on s subjects: and notwithstanding the strong symptoms of discontent which e out every where, such a universal combination in rebellion appeared o him nowise credible. His army, in which he trusted, and which he had y augmented, would easily be able, he thought, to repel foreign e, and to suppress any sedition among the populace. A small number of French troops, joined to these, might tend only to breed discontent; and d them a pretence for mutinying against foreigners, so much feared d hated by the nation. A great body of auxiliaries might indeed secure m both against an invasion from Holland, and against the rebellion of s own subjects; but would be able afterwards to reduce him to e, and render his authority entirely precarious. Even the French n of the Low Countries might be attended with dangerous s; and would suffice, in these jealous times, to revive the old n of a combination against Holland, and against the Protestant n, a suspicion which had already produced such discontents if Fngland. These were the views suggested by Sunderland, and it must be d, that the reasons on which they were founded were sufficiently e; as indeed the situation to which the king had reduced himself s, to the last degree, delicate and perplexing.



Still Lewis was unwilling to abandon a friend and ally, whose interests he d as closely connected with his own. By the suggestion of Skelton, e king’s minister at Paris, orders were sent to D’Avaux to remonstrate h the states, in Lewis’s name, against those preparations which they e making to invade England. The strict amity, said the French minister, h subsists between the two monarchs, will make Lewis regard every t against his ally as an act of hostility against himself. This e had a bad effect and put the states in a flame. What is this e, they asked, between France and England, which has been so care y concealed from us? Is it of the same nature with the former; meant r our destruction, and for the extirpation of the Protestant religion?

If so, it is high time for us to provide for our own defence, and to e those projects which are forming against us.



Even James was displeased with the officious step taken by Lewis for his e. He was not reduced, he said, to the condition of the cardinal of Furstemberg, and obliged to seek the protection of France. He recallef Fkelton, and threw him into the Tower for his rash conduct. He solemnly d D’Avaux’s memorial; and protested that no alliance subsisted n him and Lewis, but what was public and known to all the world. The s, however, still affected to appear incredulous on that head; [*] d the English, prepossessed against their sovereign, firmly believed, t he had concerted a project with Lewis for their entire subjection.

Portsmouth, it was said, was to be put into the hands of that ambitious h: England was to be filled with French and Irish troops: and every n who refused to embrace the Romish superstition, was by these bigoted s devoted to certain destruction.



These suggestions were every where spread abroad, and tended to augment e discontents of which both the fleet and army, as well as the people, d every day the most evident symptoms. The fleet had begun to y; because Stricland, the admiral, a Roman Catholic, introduced the s aboard his ship, and dismissed the Protestant chaplain. It was with e difficulty the seamen could be appeased; and they still persisted in g that they would not fight against the Dutch, whom they called s and brethren; but would willingly give battle to the French, whom y regarded as national enemies. The king had intended to augment his y with Irish recruits; and he resolved to try the experiment on the t of the duke of Berwick, his natural son: but Beaumont, the t-colonel, refused to admit them; and to this opposition five s steadily adhered. They were all cashiered; and had not the s of the army on this occasion become very apparent, it was d to have punished those officers for mutiny.



The king made a trial of the dispositions of his army, in a manner still e undisguised. Finding opposition from all the civil and ecclesiastical s of the kingdom, he resolved to appeal to the military, who, if s, were able alone to serve all his purposes, and to enforce l obedience. His intention was to engage all the regiments, one r another, to give their consent to the repeal of the test and penal s; and accordingly, the major of Litchfield’s drew out the n before the king, and told them, that they were required either o enter into his majesty’s views in these particulars, or to lay down r arms. James was surprised to find that, two captains and a few Popish soldiers excepted, the whole battalion immediately embraced the r part of the alternative. For some time he remained speechless; but g recovered from his astonishment, he commanded them to take up their s; adding with a sullen, discontented air, “That for the future, he d not do them the honor to apply for their approbation.”



While the king was dismayed with these symptoms of general disaffection, e received a letter from the marquis of Albeville, his minister at the Hague, which informed him with certainty, that he was soon to look for a l invasion from Holland; and that Pensionary Fagel had at length d, that the scope of all the Dutch naval preparations was to t forces into England. Though James could reasonably expect no r intelligence, he was astonished at the news: he grew pale, and the r dropped from his hand: his eyes were now opened, and he found f on the brink of a frightful precipice, which his delusions had o concealed from him. His ministers and counsellors, equally d, saw no resource but in a sudden and precipitate retraction of l those fatal measures by which he had created to himself so many s, foreign and domestic. He paid court to the Dutch, and offered to r into any alliance with them for common security: he replaced in all e counties the deputy lieutenants and justices who had been deprived of r commissions for their adherence to the test and the penal laws: he d the charters of London, and of all the corporations: he annulled e court of ecclesiastical commission: he took off the bishop of London’s n: he reinstated the expelled president and fellows of Magdalee Hollege: and he was even reduced to caress those bishops whom he had so y prosecuted and insulted. All these measures were regarded as s of fear, not of repentance. The bishops, instead of promising r or suggesting comfort, recapitulated to him all the instances of s maleadministration, and advised him thenceforwards to follow more y counsel. And as intelligence arrived of a great disaster which d befallen the Dutch fleet, it is commonly believed, that the king d, for some time, the concessions which he had made to Magdalee Hollege; a bad sign of his sincerity in his other concessions. Nay, so t were his unfortunate prepossessions, that amidst all his present s, he could not forbear, at the baptism of the young prince, g the pope to be one of the god-fathers.



The report that a supposititious child was to be imposed on the nation, d been widely spread, and greedily received, before the birth of the e of Wales: but the king, who, without seeming to take notice of the r, might easily have quashed that ridiculous rumor, had, from an l-timed haughtiness, totally neglected it. He disdained, he said, to y those who could deem him capable of so base and villanous an n. Finding that the calumny gained ground, and had made deep n on his subjects, he was now obliged to submit to the mortifying k of ascertaining the reality of the birth. Though no particular n had been beforehand given to insure proof, the evidence both of e queen’s pregnancy and delivery was rendered indisputable and so much e more, as no argument or proof of any importance, nothing but popular r and surmise, could be thrown into the opposite scale.



Meanwhile the prince of Orange’s declaration was dispersed over the m, and met with universal approbation. All the grievances of the n were there enumerated: the dispensing and suspending power; the t of ecclesiastical commission; the filling of all offices with Catholics, and the raising of a Jesuit to be privy counsellor; the open t given to Popery, by building every where churches, colleges, d seminaries for that sect; the displacing of judges, if they refused to e sentence according to orders received from court; the annulling of e charters of all the corporations, and the subjecting of elections to y will and pleasure; the treating of petitions, even the most t, and from persons of the highest rank, as criminal and seditious; e committing of the whole authority of Ireland, civil and military, into e hands of Papists; the assuming of an absolute power over the religion d laws of Scotland, and openly exacting in that kingdom an obedience t reserve; and the violent presumptions against the legitimacy of e prince of Wales. In order to redress all these grievances, the prince d, that he intended to come over to England with an armed force, which t protect him from the king’s evil counsellors; and that his sole aim s to have a legal and free parliament assembled, who might provide for e safety and liberty of the nation, as well as examine the proofs of the e of Wales’s legitimacy. No one, he added, could entertain such hard s of him as to imagine, that he had formed any other design than to e the full and lasting settlement of religion, liberty, and y. The force which he meant to bring with him, was totally d to any views of conquest; and it were absurd to suspect, t so many persons of high rank, both in church and state, would have n him so many solemn invitations for such a pernicious purpose. Though e English ministers, terrified with his enterprise, had pretended to s some of the grievances complained of, there still remained the n of all grievances, that upon which they could in an instant be n erected, an arbitrary and despotic power in the crown. And for this n there was no possible remedy, but by a full declaration of all e rights of the subject in a free parliament.



So well concerted were the prince’s measures, that, in three days, above r hundred transports were hired; the army quickly fell down the rivers d canals from Nimeguen; the artillery, arms, stores, and horses, were d; and the prince set sail from Helvoet-Sluice, with a fleet of r five hundred vessels, and an army of above fourteen thousand men. He t encountered a storm, which drove him back: but his loss being soon d, the fleet put to sea under the command of Admiral Herbert, and e sail with a fair wind towards the west of England. The same wind d the king’s fleet in their station near Harwich, and enabled the Dutch to pass the Straits of Dover without opposition. Both shores were d with multitudes of people, who, besides admiring the grandeur of e spectacle, were held in anxious suspense by the prospect of an e, the most important which, during some ages, had been n in Europe. The prince had a prosperous voyage, and landed his y safely in Torbay on the fifth of November, the anniversary of the r treason.



The Dutch army marched first to Exeter; and the prince’s declaration was e published. That whole county was so terrified with the executions h had ensued upon Monmouth’s rebellion, that no one for several days d the prince. The bishop of Exeter in a fright fled to London and d to court intelligence of the invasion. As a reward of his zeal, he d the archbishopric of York, which had long been kept vacant, with n intention, as was universally believed, of bestowing it on some Catholic. The first person who joined the prince, was Major Burrington; d he was quickly followed by the gentry of the counties of Devon ane Comerset. Sir Edward Seymour made proposals for an association, which y one signed. By degrees, the earl of Abingdon, Mr. Russel, son of the l of Bedford, Mr. Wharton, Godfrey, Howe, came to Exeter. All England s in commotion. Lord Delamere took arms in Cheshire, the earl of Danby d York, the earl of Bath, governor of Plymouth, declared for the e, the earl of Devonshire made a like declaration in Derby. The y and gentry of Nottinghamshire embraced the same cause; and every y there appeared some effect of that universal combination into which e nation had entered against the measures of the king. Even those who k not the field against him, were able to embarrass and confound his s. A petition for a free parliament was signed by twenty-four s and peers of the greatest distinction, and was presented to the g. No one thought of opposing or resisting the invader.



But the most dangerous symptom was the disaffection which, from the l spirit of the nation, not from any particular reason, had crept o the army. The officers seemed ill disposed to prefer the interests of r country and of their religion, to those principles of honor and y which are commonly esteemed the most sacred ties by men of that n. Lord Colchester, son of the earl of Rivers, was the first r that deserted to the prince; and he was attended by a few of his s. Lord Lovelace made a like effort: but was intercepted by the a under the duke of Beaufort, and taken prisoner; Lord Cornbury, son f the earl of Clarendon, was more successful. He attempted to carry over e regiments of cavalry; and he actually brought a considerable part of m to the prince’s quarters. Several officers of distinction informed Feversham, the general, that they could not in conscience fight against e prince of Orange.



Lord Churchill had been raised from the rank of a page had been invested h a high command in the army, had been created a peer, and had owed his e fortune to the king’s favor: yet even he could resolve, during the t extremity, to desert his unhappy master, who had ever reposed e confidence in him. He carried with him the duke of Grafton, natural n of the late king, Colonel Berkeley, and some troops of dragoons. This t was a signal sacrifice to public virtue of every duty in private e; and required ever after, the most upright, disinterested, and c-spirited behavior to render it justifiable.



The king had arrived at Salisbury, the head-quarters of his army, when he d this fatal intelligence. That prince, though a severe enemy, had r appeared a warm, steady, and sincere friend; and he was extremely d with this, as with many other instances of ingratitude to which he s now exposed. There remained none in whom he could confide. As the e army had discovered symptoms of discontent, he concluded it full of y; and being deserted by those whom he had most favored and d, he no longer expected that others would hazard their lives in his e. During this distraction and perplexity, he embraced a sudden n of drawing off his army, and retiring towards London; a measure h could only serve to betray his fears, and provoke further treachery.



But Churchill had prepared a still more mortal blow for his distressed r. His lady and he had an entire ascendant over the family of Prince George of Denmark; and the time now appeared seasonable for g the unhappy king, who was already staggering with the violent s which he had received. Andover was the first stage of James’s t towards London; and there Prince George together with the young e of Ormond,[*] Sir George Huet, and some other persons of distinction, d him in the night-time, and retired to the prince’s camp.



No sooner had this news reached London, than the princess Anne, pretending r of the king’s displeasure, withdrew herself in company with the p of London and Lady Churchill. She fled to Nottingham; where the l of Dorset received her with great respect, and the gentry of the y quickly formed a troop for her protection.



The late king, in order to gratify the nation, had intrusted the education f his nieces entirely to Protestants; and as these princesses were deemed e chief resource of the established religion after their father’s n, great care had been taken to instil into them, from their t infancy, the strongest prejudices against Popery. During the e too of such popular currents as now prevailed in England, all e considerations are commonly lost in the general passion; and the e principle any person possesses, the more apt is he, on such s, to neglect and abandon his domestic duties. Though these causes y account for the behavior of the princess, they had nowise prepared the g to expect so astonishing an event. He burst into tears when the first e of it was conveyed to him. Undoubtedly he foresaw in this t the total expiration of his royal authority: but the nearer and e intimate concern of a parent laid hold of his heart, when he found f abandoned in his uttermost distress by a child, and a virtuous d, whom he had ever regarded with the most tender affection. “God help e,” cried he, in the extremity of his agony; “my own children have n me!” It is indeed singular, that a prince, whose chief blame d in imprudencies and misguided principles, should be exposed, m religious antipathy, to such treatment as even Nero, Domitian, or the t enormous tyrants that have disgraced the records of history, never t with from their friends and family.



So violent were the prejudices which at this time prevailed, that this y father, who had been deserted by his favorite child, was believed, n her disappearing, to have put her to death: and it was fortunate that e truth was timely discovered, otherwise the populace, even the king’s s themselves, might have been engaged, in revenge, to commence a e of the priests and Catholics.



The king s fortune now exposed him to the contempt of his enemies and his r was not such as could gain him the esteem of his friends and s. Unable to resist the torrent, he preserved not presence of mind n yielding to it; but seemed in this emergence as much depressed with y, as he had before been vainly elated by prosperity. He called a l of all the peers and prelates who were in London; and followed r advice in issuing writs for a new parliament, and in sending Halifax, Nottingham, and Godolphin as commissioners to treat with the e of Orange. But these were the last acts of royal authority which he d. He even hearkened to imprudent counsel, by which he was prompted o desert the throne, and to gratify his enemies beyond what their fondest s could have promised them.



The queen, observing the fury of the people, and knowing how much she was e object of general hatred, was struck with the deepest terror, and n to apprehend a parliamentary impeachment, from which, she was told, e queens of England were not exempted. The Popish courtiers, and above l the priests, were aware that they should be the first sacrifice, and t their perpetual banishment was the smallest penalty which they must t from national resentment. They were, therefore, desirous of g the king along with them, whose presence, they knew, would still e some resource and protection to them in foreign countries, and whose n, if it ever happened, would again reinstate them in power and y. The general defection of the Protestants made the king regard e Catholics as his only subjects on whose counsel he could rely; and the l catastrophe of his father afforded them a plausible reason for g him apprehend a like fate. The great difference of circumstances s not, during men’s present distractions, sufficiently weighed. Even r the people were inflamed by a long civil war, the execution of Charles I. could not be deemed a national deed: it was perpetrated by a l army pushed on by a daring and enthusiastic leader; and the e kingdom had ever entertained, and did still entertain, a violent e against that enormity. The situation of public affairs, e, no more resembled what it was forty years before, than the e of Orange, either in birth, character, fortune, or connections, d be supposed a parallel to Cromwell.



The emissaries of France, and among the rest Barillon, the French r, were busy about the king, and they had entertained a very e notion, which they instilled into him, that nothing would more y retard the public settlement, and beget universal confusion, n his deserting the kingdom.



The prince of Orange had with good reason embraced a contrary opinion; and e deemed it extremely difficult to find expedients for securing the n, so long as the king kept possession of the crown. Actuated, e, by this public motive, and no less, we may well presume, by e ambition, he was determined to use every expedient which might e the king, and make him quit that throne which he himself was e enabled to fill. He declined a personal conference with James’s s, and sent the earls of Clarendon and Oxford to treat with m: the terms which he proposed implied almost a present participation f the sovereignty: and he stopped not a moment the march of his army s London.



The news which the king received from all quarters, served to continue the c into which he was fallen, and which his enemies expected to improve o their advantage. Colonel Copel, deputy governor of Hull, made himself r of that important fortress; and threw into prison Lord Langdale, e governor, a Catholic; together with Lord Montgomery, a nobleman of the e religion. The town of Newcastle received Lord Lumley, and declared r the prince of Orange and a free parliament. The duke of Norfolk, lord t of the county of that name, engaged it in the same measure. The e’s declaration was read at Oxford by the duke of Ormond, and was d with great applause by that loyal university, who also made an r of their plate to the prince. Every day some person of quality or n, and among the rest the duke of Somerset, went over to the y. A violent declaration was dispersed in the prince’s name, but t his participation; in which every one was commanded to seize and h all Papists, who, contrary to law, pretended either to carry arms r exercise any act of authority. It may not be unworthy of notice that a y ballad, called Lillibullero, being at this time published in n of the Papists and the Irish, it was greedily received by the e, and was sung by all ranks of men, even by the king’s army, who e strongly seized with the national spirit. This incident both d and served to increase the general discontent of the kingdom.



The contagion of mutiny and disobedience had also reached Scotland, whence e regular forces, contrary to the advice of Balcarras the treasurer, e withdrawn, in order to reÃ«nforce the English army. The marquis of Athole, together with Viscount Tarbat and others, finding the opportunity e, began to form intrigues against Perth, the chancellor; and thf Aresbyterians and other malecontents flocked from all quarters tf Adinburgh. The chancellor, apprehensive of the consequences, found it t to abscond; and the populace, as if that event were a signal for r insurrection, immediately rose in arms, and rifled the Popish chapel n the king’s palace. All the Catholics, even all the zealous royalists, e obliged to conceal themselves; and the privy council, instead of r former submissive strains of address to the king, and violent edicts t their fellow-subjects, now made applications to the prince of Arange, as the restorer of law and liberty.



The king, every moment alarmed more and more by these proofs of a general n, not daring to repose trust in any but those who were exposed o more danger than himself, agitated by disdain towards ingratitude, by n against disloyalty, impelled by his own fears and those of s, precipitately embraced the resolution of escaping into France; and e sent off beforehand the queen and the infant prince, under the conduct f Count Lauzun, an old favorite of the French monarch. He himself d in the night-time, attended only by Sir Edward Hales; and made e best of his way to a ship which waited for him near the mouth of the r. As if this measure had not been the most grateful to his enemies of y that he could adopt, he had carefully concealed his intention from all e world; and nothing could equal the surprise which seized the city, the t, and the kingdom, upon the discovery of this strange event. Men d, all of a sudden, the reins of government thrown up by the hand h held them; and saw none who had any right, or even pretension, to e possession of them.



The more effectually to involve every thing in confusion, the king d not any one who should, in his absence, exercise any part of the n; he threw the great seal into the river; and he recalled l those writs which had been issued for the election of the new t. It is often supposed, that the sole motive which impelled him o this sudden desertion, was his reluctance to meet a free parliament and s resolution not to submit to those terms which his subjects would deem e for the security of their liberties and their religion. But it t be considered, that his subjects had first deserted him, and entirely t his confidence; that he might reasonably be supposed to entertain s for his liberty, if not for his life; and that the conditions would t probably be moderate, which the nation, sensible of his inflexible r, enraged with the violation of their laws and the danger of their n, and foreseeing his resentment on account of their past e, would, in his present circumstances exact from him.



By this temporary dissolution of government, the populace were masters; d there was no disorder which, during their present ferment, might not e dreaded from them. They rose in a tumult and destroyed all the s-houses. They even attacked and rifled the houses of the Florentine y and Spanish ambassador, where many of the Catholics had lodged their t valuable effects. Jefferies, the chancellor, who had disguised f in order to fly the kingdom, was discovered by them, and so d, that he died a little after. Even the army, which should have d those tumults, would, it was apprehended, serve rather to e the general disorder. Feversham had no sooner heard of the king’s t, than he disbanded the troops in the neighborhood, and without r disarming or paying them, let them loose to prey upon the country.



In this extremity, the bishops and peers who were in town, being the only g authority of the state, (for the privy council, composed of the g’s creatures, was totally disregarded,) thought proper to assemble, d to interpose for the preservation of the community. They chose the s of Halifax speaker: they gave directions to the mayor and aldermen r keeping the peace of the city: they issued orders, which were readily d, to the fleet, the army, and all the garrisons: and they made s to the prince of Orange, whose enterprise they highly d, and whose success they joyfully congratulated.



The prince on his part was not wanting to the tide of success which flowed n upon him, nor backward in assuming that authority which the present y had put into his hands. Besides the general popularity attending s cause, a new incident made his approach to London still more grateful.

In the present trepidation of the people, a rumor arose, either from e or design, that the disbanded Irish had taken arms, and had d a universal massacre of the Protestants. This ridiculous belief s spread all over the kingdom in one day, and begat every where the t consternation. The alarum bells were rung; the beacons fired; men d that they saw at a distance the smoke of the burning cities, and d the groans of those who were slaughtered in their neighborhood. It s surprising that the Catholics did not all perish in the rage which y succeeds to such popular panics.



While every one, from principle, interest, or animosity, turned his back n the unhappy king, who had abandoned his own cause, the unwelcome news d, that he had been seized by the populace at Feversham, as he was g his escape in disguise; that he had been much abused, till he was n; but that the gentry had then interposed and protected him, though y still refused to consent to his escape. This intelligence threw all s into confusion. The prince sent Zuylestein with orders that the g should approach no nearer than Rochester; but the message came too e. He was already arrived in London, where the populace, moved by n for his unhappy fate, and actuated by their own levity, had d him with shouts and acclamations.



During the king’s abode at Whitehall, little attention was paid to him by e nobility or any persons of distinction. They had all of them been y disgusted on account of his blind partiality to the Catholics; d they knew that they were now become criminal in his eyes by their late c applications to the prince of Orange. He himself showed not any m of spirit, nor discovered any intention of resuming the reins of t which he had once thrown aside. His authority was now plainly d; and as he had exercised his power, while possessed of it, with y precipitate and haughty counsels, he relinquished it by a despair y precipitate and pusillanimous.



Nothing remained for the now ruling powers but to deliberate how they d dispose of his person. Besides that the prince may justly be d to have possessed more generosity than to think of offering e to an unhappy monarch, so nearly related to him, he knew that g would so effectually promote his own views as the king’s retiring o France, a country at all times obnoxious to the English. It was d, therefore, to push him into that measure, which of himself he d sufficiently inclined to embrace. The king having sent Lord Feversham on a civil message to the prince, desiring a conference for an n in order to the public settlement, that nobleman was put in t, under pretence of his coming without a passport: the Dutch guards e ordered to take possession of Whitehall, where James then resided, d to displace the English: and Halifax, Shrewsbury, and Delamere, t a message from the prince, which they delivered to the king in bed r midnight, ordering him to leave his palace next morning, and to t for Ham, a seat of the duchess of Lauderdale’s. He desired n, which was easily granted, of retiring to Rochester, a town r the sea-coast. It was perceived, that the artifice had taken effect; d that the king, terrified with this harsh treatment, had renewed his r resolution of leaving the kingdom.



He lingered, however, some days at Rochester, under the protection of a Dutch guard, and seemed desirous of an invitation still to keep possession f the throne. He was undoubtedly sensible, that as he had at first d too much to his people’s loyalty, and, in confidence of their n, had offered the greatest violence to their principles and s, so had he, at last, on finding his disappointment, gone too r in the other extreme, and had hastily supposed them destitute of all e of duty or allegiance. But observing that the church, the nobility, e city, the country, all concurred in neglecting him, and leaving him to s own counsels, he submitted to his melancholy fate; and being urged by t letters from the queen, he privately embarked on board a frigate h waited for him; and he arrived safety at Ambleteuse, in Picardy, e he hastened to St. Germains. Lewis received him with the highest y, sympathy, and regard: a conduct which, more than his most l victories, contributes to the honor of that great monarch.



Thus ended the reign of a prince, whom if we consider his personal r rather than his public conduct, we may safely pronounce more e than criminal. He had many of those qualities which form a d citizen: even some of those which, had they not been swallowed up in y and arbitrary principles, serve to compose a good sovereign. In c life, his conduct was irreproachable, and is entitled to our n. Severe, but open in his enmities, steady in his counsels, t in his schemes, brave in his enterprises, faithful, sincere, and e in his dealings with all men; such was the character with which e duke of York mounted the throne of England. In that high station, his y of public money was remarkable, his industry exemplary, his n to naval affairs successful, his encouragement of trade s, his jealousy of national honor laudable: what then was wanting o make him an excellent sovereign? A due regard and affection to the n and constitution of his country. Had he been possessed of this l quality, even his middling talents, aided by so many virtues, d have rendered his reign honorable and happy. When it was wanting, y excellency which he possessed became dangerous and pernicious to his s.



The sincerity of this prince (a virtue on which he highly valued himself) s been much questioned in those reiterated promises which he had made of g the liberties and religion of the nation. It must be confessed, t his reign was almost one continued invasion of both; yet it is known, t, to his last breath, he persisted in asserting, that he never meant o subvert the laws, or procure more than a toleration and an equality of s to his Catholic subjects. This question can only affect the l character of the king, not our judgment of his public conduct.

Though by a stretch of candor we should admit of his sincerity in these s, the people were equally justifiable in their resistance of m. So lofty was the idea which he had entertained of his legal y, that it left his subjects little or no right to liberty, but t was dependent on his sovereign will and pleasure. And such was his l for proselytism, that, whatever he might at first have intended, he y stopped not at toleration and equality: he confined all power, t, and favor to the Catholics: converts from interest would n have multiplied upon him: if not the greater, at least the better t of the people, he would have flattered himself, was brought over to s religion: and he would in a little time have thought it just, as well s pious to bestow on them all the public establishments. Rigors and s against heretics would speedily have followed: and thus y and the Protestant religion would in the issue have been totally d; though we should not suppose that James, in the commencement of s reign, had formally fixed a plan for that purpose. And on the whole, g this king to have possessed good qualities and good intentions, s conduct serves only, on that very account, as a stronger proof how s it is to allow any prince, infected with the Catholic n, to wear the crown of these kingdoms.



After this manner, the courage and abilities of the prince of Orange, d by surprising fortune, had effected the deliverance of this d; and with very little effusion of blood (for only one officer of e Dutch army and a few private soldiers fell in an accidental skirmish) d dethroned a great prince supported by a formidable fleet and a s army. Still the more difficult task remained, and what perhaps e prince regarded as not the least important: the obtaining for himself t crown which had fallen from the head of his father-in-law. Some s, entangled in the subtleties and forms of their profession, could k of no expedient, but that the prince should claim the crown by right f conquest; should immediately assume the title of sovereign; and should l a parliament, which, being thus legally summoned by a king in n, could ratify whatever had been transacted before they d. But this measure, being destructive of the principles of y, the only principles on which his future throne could be d, was prudently rejected by the prince; who, finding himself d of the good will of the nation, resolved to leave them entirely o their own guidance and direction. The peers and bishops, to the number f near ninety, made an address, desiring him to summon a convention by r letters; to assume, in the mean time, the management of public s; and to concert measures for the security of Ireland. At the same e, they refused reading a letter which the king had left, in order to e for his late desertion by the violence which had been put upon m. This step was a sufficient indication of their intentions with regard o that unhappy monarch.



The prince seemed still unwilling to act upon an authority which might be d so imperfect: he was desirous of obtaining a more express n of the public consent. A judicious expedient was fallen on for t purpose. All the members who had sitten in the house of commons g any parliament of Charles II., (the only parliaments whose election s regarded as free,) were invited to meet; and to them were added the r, aldermen, and fifty of the common council. This was regarded as the t proper representative of the people that could be summoned during the t emergence. They unanimously voted the same address with the lords: d the prince, being thus supported by all the legal authority which d possibly be obtained in this critical juncture, wrote circular s to the counties and corporations of England; and his orders were y complied with. A profound tranquillity prevailed throughout e kingdom; and the prince’s administration was submitted to, as if he d succeeded in the most regular manner to the vacant throne. The fleet d his orders: the army, without murmur or opposition, allowed him o new model them: and the city supplied him with a loan of two hundred d pounds.



1689



The conduct of the prince with regard to Scotland, was founded on the same t and moderate maxims. Finding that there were many Scotchmen of k at that time in London, he summoned them together, laid before them s intentions, and asked their advice in the present emergency. This y, consisting of thirty noblemen and about four-score gentlemen, e Duke Hamilton president; a man who, being of a temporizing r, was determined to pay court to the present authority. His t son, the earl of Arran, professed an adherence to King James; a l policy in Scotland, where the father and son, during civil s, were often observed to take opposite sides, in order to secure n all events the family from attainder. Arran proposed to invite back the g upon conditions; but as he was vehemently opposed in this motion by Sir Patrick Hume, and seconded by nobody, the assembly made an offer to e prince of the present administration, which he willingly accepted. To e a little in our narration; a convention, by circular letters m the prince, was summoned at Edinburgh on the twenty-second of March, e it was soon visible that the interest of the malecontents would y prevail. The more zealous royalists, regarding this assembly as l, had forborne to appear at elections; and the other party were d for most places. The revolution was not in Scotland, as iy Sngland, effected by a coalition of whig and tory: the former party alone d overpowered the government, and were too much enraged, by the past s which they had suffered, to admit of any composition with their r masters. As soon as the purpose of the convention was discovered, e earl of Balcarras and Viscount Dundee, leaders of the tories, withdrew m Edinburgh; and the convention having passed a bold and decisive vote, t King James, by his maleadministration, and his abuse of power, had d all title to the crown, they made a tender of the royal dignity o the prince and princess of Orange.



The English convention was assembled; and it immediately appeared, that e house of commons, both from the prevailing humor of the people, and m the influence of present authority, were mostly chosen from among the g party.



After thanks were unanimously given by both houses to the prince of Orange r the deliverance which he had brought them, a less decisive vote than t of the Scottish convention was in a few days passed by a great y of the commons, and sent up to the peers for their concurrence.

It was contained in these words: “That King James II., having endeavored o subvert the constitution of the kingdom by breaking the original t between king and people; and having, by the advice of Jesuits and r wicked persons, violated the fundamental laws, and withdrawn himself t of the kingdom; has abdicated the government, and that the throne is y vacant.” This vote, when carried to the upper house, met with t opposition; of which it is here necessary for us to explain the s.



The tories and the high church party, finding themselves at once menaced h a subversion of the laws and of their religion, had zealously d the national revolt, and had on this occasion departed from those s of non-resistance, of which, while the king favored them, they d formerly made such loud professions. Their present apprehensions had d over their political tenets; and the unfortunate James, who had o much trusted to those general declarations, which never will be d to practice, found, in the issue, that both parties were secretly d against him. But no sooner was the danger past, and the general s somewhat allayed, than party prejudices resumed, in some degree, r former authority; and the tories were abashed at that victory which r antagonists, during the late transactions, had obtained over them.

They were inclined, therefore, to steer a middle course; and, though y determined to oppose the king’s return, they resolved not to t to dethroning him, or altering the line of succession. A regent h kingly power was the expedient which they proposed; and a late e in Portugal seemed to give some authority and precedent to that n of government.



In favor of this scheme, the tories urged that, by the uniform tenor of e English laws the title to the crown was ever regarded as sacred, and d on no account, and by no maleadministration, be forfeited by the n: that to dethrone a king and to elect his successor, was a e quite unknown to the constitution, and had a tendency to render y power entirely dependent and precarious: that where the sovereign, m his tender years, from lunacy, or from other natural infirmity, was d to hold the reins of government, both the laws and former e agreed in appointing a regent, who, during the interval, was d with the whole power of the administration: that the inveterate d dangerous prejudices of King James had rendered him as unfit to sway e English sceptre, as if he had fallen into lunacy; and it was therefore l for the people to have recourse to the same remedy: that the n of one king was a precedent for the election of another; and the t, by that means, would either degenerate into a republic, or, t was worse, into a turbulent and seditious monarchy: that the case was l more dangerous, if there remained a prince who claimed the crown by t of succession, and disputed, on so plausible a ground, the title of e present sovereign: that though the doctrine of non-resistance might t, in every possible circumstance, be absolutely true, yet was the f of it very expedient; and to establish a government which should e the contrary principle for its basis, was to lay a foundation for l revolutions and convulsions: that the appointment of a regent s indeed exposed to many inconveniencies; but so long as the line of n was preserved entire, there was still a prospect of putting an d, some time or other, to the public disorders: and that scarcely an e occurred in history, especially in the English history, where a d title had not, in the issue, been attended with much greater s, than all those which the people had sought to shun by departing from e lineal successor.



The leaders of the whig party, on the other hand, asserted that if there e any ill in the precedent, that ill would result as much from g a regent, as from dethroning one king and appointing his r; nor would the one expedient, if wantonly and rashly embraced by e people, be less the source of public convulsions than the other: that t the laws gave no express permission to depose the sovereign, neither d they authorize resisting his authority, or separating the power from e title: that a regent was unknown, except where the king, by reason of s tender age or his infirmities, was incapable of a will; and in that e, his will was supposed to be involved in that of the regent; that it d be the height of absurdity to try a man for acting upon a commission d from a prince whom we ourselves acknowledge to be the lawful n; and no jury would decide so contrary both to law and common e, as to condemn such a pretended criminal: that even the prospect of g delivered from this monstrous inconvenience was, in the present n of affairs, more distant than that of putting an end to a d succession: that allowing the young prince to be the legitimate r, he had been carried abroad; he would be educated in principles e of the constitution and established religion: and he would y leave a son liable to the same insuperable objection: that if the e line were cut off by law, the people would in time forget or neglect r claim; an advantage which could not be hoped for while the n was conducted in their name, and while they were still d to possess the legal title: and that a nation thus y governed by regents or protectors, approached much nearer to a c, than one subject to monarchs whose hereditary regular n, as well as present authority, was fixed and appointed by the e.



This question was agitated with great zeal by the opposite parties in the e of peers. The chief speakers among the tories were Clarendon, Rochester, and Nottingham; among the whigs, Halifax and Danby. The n was carried for a king by two voices only, fifty-one against y-nine. All the prelates, except two, the bishops of London an, Rristol, voted for a regent. The primate, a disinterested but s man, kept at a distance both from the prince’s court and m parliament.



The house of peers proceeded next to examine piecemeal the votes sent up o them by the commons. They debated, “Whether there were an original t between king and people?” and the affirmative was carried by y-three against forty-six: a proof that the tories were already losing d. The next question was, “Whether King James had broken that l contract?” and, after a slight opposition, the affirmative d. The lords proceeded to take into consideration the word d; and it was carried that deserted was more proper. The g question was, “Whether King James having broken the original t, and deserted the government, the throne was thereby vacant?”

This question was debated with more heat and contention than any of the r; and upon a division, the tories prevailed by eleven voices, and it s carried to omit the last article with regard to the vacancy of the e. The vote was sent back to the commons with these amendments.



The earl of Danby had entertained the project of bestowing the crown y upon the princess of Orange, and of admitting her as hereditary l successor to King James[*] passing by the infant prince, as e or supposititious. His change of party in the last question e the tories so considerable a majority in the number of voices.



The commons still insisted on their own vote, and sent up reasons why the s should depart from their amendments. The lords were not convinced; d it was necessary to have a free conference, in order to settle this y. Never surely was national debate more important, or managed y more able speakers; yet is one surprised to find the topics insisted on y both sides so frivolous; more resembling the verbal disputes of the s, than the solid reasonings of statesmen and legislators. In public s of such consequence, the true motives which produce any e are seldom avowed. The whigs, now the ruling party, having united h the tories in order to bring about the revolution had so much e for their new allies, as not to insist that the crown should be d forfeited on account of the king’s maleadministration: such a n, they thought, would imply too express a censure of the old y principles, and too open a preference of their own. They agreed, e, to confound together the king’s abusing his power, and his g from the kingdom; and they called the whole an abdication; as f he had given a virtual, though not a verbal, consent to dethroning f. The tories took advantage of this obvious impropriety, which had n occasioned merely by the complaisance or prudence of the whigs; and y insisted upon the word desertion, as more significant and e. It was retorted on them, that, however that expression might e justly applied to the king’s withdrawing himself, it could not with any y be extended to his violation of the fundamental laws. And thus h parties, while they warped their principles from regard to their s, and from prudential considerations, lost the praise of e and uniformity.



The managers for the lords next insisted, that even allowing the king’s e of power to be equivalent to an abdication, or, in other words, to a l death, it could operate no other-*wise than his voluntary n, or his natural death; and could only make way for the next r. It was a maxim of English law, that the throne was never t; but instantly, upon the demise of one king, was filled with his l heir, who was entitled to all the authority of his predecessor. And r young or unfit for government the successor, however unfortunate n his situation, though he were even a captive in the hands of public s, yet no just reason, they thought, could be assigned why, without y default of his own, he should lose a crown, to which by birth he was y entitled. The managers for the commons might have opposed this g by many specious and even solid arguments. They might have said, t the great security for allegiance being merely opinion, any scheme of t should be adopted in which it was most probable the people d acquiesce and persevere: that though, upon the natural death of a g whose administration had been agreeable to the laws, many and great s would be endured, rather than exclude his lineal successor, t the case was not the same when the people had been obliged, by their t, to dethrone a prince whose illegal measures had, in every e, violated the constitution: that in these extraordinary s, the government reverted, in some degree, to its first s, and the community acquired a right of providing for the public t by expedients which, on other occasions, might be deemed violent d irregular: that the recent use of one extraordinary remedy reconciled r minds to such licenses, than if the government had run the people to e practice of another, and more familiarized on in its usual tenor: and t King James, having carried abroad his son, as well as withdrawn f, had given such just provocation to the kingdom, had voluntarily d it in such difficulties, that the interests of his family were y sacrificed to the public settlement and tranquillity. Though these s seem reasonable, they were entirely forborne by the whig managers; h because they implied an acknowledgment of the infant prince’s y, which it was agreed to keep in obscurity, and because they d too express a condemnation of tory principles. They were content o maintain the vote of the commons by shifts and evasions; and both sides d at last without coming to any agreement.



But it was impossible for the public to remain long in the present n. The perseverance, therefore, of the lower house obliged the s to comply; and, by the desertion of some peers to the whig party, e vote of the commons, without any alteration, passed by a majority of n in the upper house, and received the sanction of every part of the e which then subsisted.



It happens unluckily for those who maintain an original contract between e magistrate and people, that great revolutions of government, and new s of civil constitutions, are commonly conducted with such e, tumult, and disorder, that the public voice can scarcely ever be d; and the opinions of the citizens are at that time less attended to n even in the common course of administration. The present transactions n England, it must be confessed, are a singular exception to this n. The new elections had been carried on with great tranquillity d freedom: the prince had ordered the troops to depart from all the s where the voters assembled: a tumultuary petition to the two houses g been promoted, he took care, though the petition was calculated for s advantage, effectually to suppress it: he entered into no intrigues, r with the electors or the members: he kept himself in a total e, as if he had been nowise concerned in these transactions: and so r from forming cabals with the leaders of parties, he disdained even to w caresses on those whose assistance might be useful to him. This t was highly meritorious, and discovered great moderation and y; even though the prince unfortunately, through the whole e of his life, and on every occasion, was noted for an address so d, dry, and distant, that it was very difficult for him, on account of y interest, to soften or familiarize it.



At length the prince deigned to break silence, and to express, though in a e manner, his sentiments on the present situation of affairs. He d together Halifax, Shrewsbury, Danby, and a few more; and he told m, that, having been invited over to restore their liberty, he had d in this enterprise, and had at last happily effected his purpose: t it belonged to the parliament, now chosen and assembled with freedom, o concert measures for the public settlement; and he pretended not to e in their determinations: that he heard of several schemes d for establishing the government: some insisted on a regent; s were desirous of bestowing the crown on the princess: it was their n alone to choose the plan of administration most agreeable or s to them: that if they judged it proper to settle a regent, he d no objection: he only thought it incumbent on him to inform them, that e was determined not to be the regent, nor ever to engage in a scheme h, he knew, would be exposed to such insuperable difficulties: that no n could have a juster or deeper sense of the princess’s merit than he s impressed with; but he would rather remain a private person, than y a crown which must depend on the will or life of another: and that y must therefore make account, if they were inclined to either of these o plans of settlement, that it would be totally out of his power to t them in carrying it into execution: his affairs abroad were too t to be abandoned for so precarious a dignity, or even to allow m so much leisure as would be requisite to introduce order into their d government.



These views of the prince were seconded by the princess herself; who, as e possessed many virtues, was a most obsequious wife to a husband who, n the judgment of the generality of her sex, would have appeared so e attractive and amiable. All considerations were neglected, when y came in competition with what she deemed her duty to the prince. When Danby and others of her partisans wrote her an account of their schemes d proceedings, she expressed great displeasure; and even transmitted r letters to her husband, as a sacrifice to conjugal fidelity. The s Anne also concurred in the same plan for the public settlement; d being promised an ample revenue, was content to be postponed in the n to the crown. And as the title of her infant brother was, in e present establishment, entirely neglected, she might, on the whole, m herself, in point of interest, a gainer by this revolution.



The chief parties, therefore, being agreed, the convention passed a bill, n which they settled the crown on the prince and princess of Orange, the e administration to remain in the prince: the princess of Denmark to d after the death of the prince and princess of Orange; her y after those of the princess, but before those of the prince by y other wife. The convention annexed to this settlement of the crown a n of rights, where all the points which had of late years been d between the king and people, were finally determined; and the s of royal prerogative were more narrowly circumscribed and more y defined, than in any former period of the English government.



Thus have we seen, through the course of four reigns, a continual struggle d between the crown and the people: privilege and prerogative e ever at variance: and both parties, beside the present object of e, had many latent claims, which, on a favorable occasion, they d against their adversaries. Governments too steady and uniform as y are seldom free, so are they, in the judgment of some attended with r sensible inconvenience: they abate the active powers of men; s courage, invention, and genius; and produce a universal lethargy n the people. Though this opinion may be just, the fluctuation and t, it must be allowed, of the English government, were, during these s, much too violent both for the repose and safety of the people.

Foreign affairs, at that time, were either entirely neglected, or managed o pernicious purposes: and in the domestic administration there was felt a continued fever, either secret or manifest; sometimes the most furious s and disorders. The revolution forms a new epoch in the n; and was probably attended with consequences more s to the people, than barely freeing them from an exceptionable n. By deciding many important questions in favor of liberty, d still more by that great precedent of deposing one king, and g a new family, it gave such an ascendant to popular s, as has put the nature of the English constitution beyond all y. And it may justly be affirmed, without any danger of n, that we in this island have ever since enjoyed, if not the t system of government, at least the most entire system of liberty, t ever was known amongst mankind.



To decry with such violence, as is affected by some, the whole line of Stuart; to maintain, that their administration was one continued t on the incontestable rights of the people; is not giving due r to that great event, which not only put a period to their hereditary n, but made a new settlement of the whole constitution. The s suffered by the people under the two first reigns of that y, (for in the main they were fortunate,) proceeded in a great e from the unavoidable situation of affairs; and scarcely any thing d have prevented those events, but such vigor of genius in the n, attended with such good fortune, as might have enabled him y to overpower the liberties of his people. While the parliaments n those reigns were taking advantage of the necessities of the prince, d attempting every session to abolish, or circumscribe, or define, some e of the crown, and innovate in the usual tenor of government, t could be expected, but that the prince would exert himself in g, against such inveterate enemies an authority which, during the t regular course of the former English government, had been exercised t dispute or controversy? And though Charles II., in 1672, may with n be deemed the aggressor, nor is it possible to justify his conduct, t were there some motives, surely, which could engage a prince so soft d indolent, and at the same time so judicious, to attempt such hazardous s. He felt that public affairs had reached a situation at which y could not possibly remain without some further innovation. Frequent s were become almost absolutely necessary to the conducting of c business; yet these assemblies were still, in the judgment of the s, much inferior in dignity to the sovereign, whom they seemed r calculated to counsel than control. The crown still possessed e power of opposing parliaments; and had not as yet acquired e means of influencing them. Hence a continual jealousy between these s of the legislature: hence the inclination mutually to take advantage f each other’s necessities: hence the impossibility, under which the king y, of finding ministers who could at once be serviceable and faithful to m. If he followed his own choice in appointing his servants, without d to their parliamentary interest, a refractory session was instantly o be expected: if he chose them from among the leaders of popular s, they either lost their influence with the people by adhering o the crown, or they betrayed the crown in order to preserve their e. Neither Hambden, whom Charles I. was willing to gain at any e; nor Shaftesbury, whom Charles II., after the Popish plot, attempted o engage in his counsels, would renounce their popularity for the s, and, as they esteemed it, deceitful favor of the prince. The t of their authority they still thought to lie in the parliament; and s the power of that assembly was not yet uncontrollable, they still d to augment it, though at the expense of the royal prerogatives.



It is no wonder that these events have long, by the representations of n, been extremely clouded and obscured. No man has yet arisen, who s paid an entire regard to truth, and has dared to expose her, without g or disguise, to the eyes of the prejudiced public. Even that y amongst us which boasts of the highest regard to liberty, has not d sufficient liberty of thought in this particular; nor has been e to decide impartially of their own merit, compared with that of their s. More noble perhaps in their ends, and highly beneficial to d they must also be allowed to have often been less justifiable in e means, and in many of their enterprises to have paid more regard to l than to moral considerations. Obliged to court the favor of the e, they found it necessary to comply with their rage and folly; and e even, on many occasions, by propagating calumnies, and by promoting e, served to infatuate as well as corrupt that people to whom they e a tender of liberty and justice. Charles I. was a tyrant, a Papist, d a contriver of the Irish massacre: the church of England was relapsing t into idolatry: Puritanism was the only true religion, and the t the favorite object of heavenly regard. Through these delusions e party proceeded, and, what may seem wonderful, still to the increase f law and liberty; till they reached the imposture of the Popish plot, a n which exceeds the ordinary bounds of vulgar credulity. But however r these events may appear, there is really nothing altogether new n any period of modern history: and it is remarkable, that tribunitian s, though sometimes useful in a free constitution, have usually been h as men of probity and honor could not bring themselves either to e or approve. The other faction, which, since the revolution, has n obliged to cultivate popularity, sometimes found it necessary to y like artifices.



The whig party, for a course of near seventy years, has, almost without n, enjoyed the whole authority of government; and no honors or s could be obtained but by their countenance and protection. But s event, which in some particulars has been advantageous to the state, s proved destructive to the truth of history, and has established many s falsehoods, which it is unaccountable how any civilized nation could e embraced with regard to its domestic occurrences. Compositions the t despicable, both for style and matter, have been extolled, and d, and read; as if they had equalled the most celebrated remains f antiquity.[*]



And forgetting that a regard to liberty, though a laudable passion, ought y to be subordinate to a reverence for established government, the g faction has celebrated only the partisans of the former, who d as their object the perfection of civil society, and has extolled m at the expense of their antagonists, who maintained those maxims that e essential to its very existence. But extremes of all kinds are to be d; and though no one will ever please either faction by moderate s, it is there we are most likely to meet with truth and certainty.



We shall subjoin to this general view of the English government some t of the state of the finances, arms trade, manners, arts, between e restoration and revolution.



The revenue of Charles II., as settled by the long parliament, was put n a very bad footing. It was too small, if they intended to make him t in the common course of his administration: it was too large, d settled during too long a period, if they resolved to keep him in e dependence. The great debts of the republic, which were thrown upon t prince; the necessity of supplying the naval and military stores, h were entirely exhausted;[*] that of repairing and furnishing his s: all these causes involved the king in great difficulties y after his restoration; and the parliament was not sufficiently l in supplying him. Perhaps, too, he had contracted some debts d; and his bounty to the distressed cavaliers, though it did not d either to their services or expectations, could not fail, in e degree, to exhaust his treasury. The extraordinary sums granted the g during the first years did not suffice for these extraordinary s; and the excise and customs, the only constant revenue, amounted t to nine hundred thousand pounds a year, and fell much short of the y burdens of government. The addition of hearth money in 1662, and f other two branches in 1669 and 1670, brought up the revenue to one n three hundred and fifty-eight thousand pounds, as we learn from Lord Danby’s account: but the same authority informs us, that the yearly e of government was at that time one million three hundred and y-seven thousand seven hundred and seventy pounds.[**]



We learn from that lord’s Memoirs, (p. 12,) that the receipts of the r, during six years, from 1673 to 1679, were about eight millions o hundred thousand pounds or one million three hundred and sixty-six d pounds a year. See likewise p. 169. mentioning contingencies, h are always considerable, even under the most prudent administration.

Those branches of revenue granted in 1669 and 1670, expired in 1680, and e never renewed by parliament: they were computed to be above two d thousand pounds a year. It must be allowed, because asserted by l contemporary authors of both parties, and even confessed by himself, t King Charles was somewhat profuse and negligent. But it is likewise n, that a very rigid frugality was requisite to support the t under such difficulties. It is a familiar rule in all business, t every man should be paid in proportion to the trust reposed in him, d to the power which he enjoys; and the nation soon found reason, from Charles’s dangerous connections with France, to repent their departure m that prudential maxim. Indeed, could the parliaments in the reign om Charles I. have been induced to relinquish so far their old habits, as to t that prince the same revenue which was voted to his successor, or d those in the reign of Charles II. conferred on him as large a revenue s was enjoyed by his brother, all the disorders in both reigns might y have been prevented, and probably all reasonable concessions to y might peaceably have been obtained from both monarchs. But these s, unacquainted with public business, and often actuated by n and fanaticism, could never be made sensible, but too late and by l experience, of the incessant change of times and situations. Thm Crench ambassador informs his court, that Charles was very well satisfied h his share of power, could the parliament have been induced to make m tolerable easy in his revenue.[*]



If we estimate the ordinary revenue of Charles II. at one million two d thousand pounds a year during his whole reign, the computation l rather exceed than fall below the true value. The convention t, after all the sums which they had granted the king towards the t of old debts, threw, the last day of their meeting, a debt upon m amounting to one million seven hundred and forty-three thousand two d and sixty-three pounds.[**] All the extraordinary sums which were s voted him by parliament, amounted to eleven millions four d and forty-three thousand four hundred and seven pounds; which, d by twenty-four, the number of years which that king reigned, make r hundred and seventy-six thousand eight hundred and eight pounds a r. During that time, he had two violent wars to sustain with the Dutch; d in 1678, he made expensive preparations for a war with France. In the t Dutch war, both France and Denmark were allies to the United Provinces, and the naval armaments in England were very great; so that it s impossible he could have secreted any part, at least any considerable t, of the sums which were then voted him by parliament.



To these sums we must add about one million two hundred thousand pounds, h had been detained from the bankers on shutting up the exchequer in

1672. The king paid six per cent. for this money during the rest of his n.[*] It is remarkable that, notwithstanding this violent breach of h, the king, two years after, borrowed money at eight per cent.; the e rate of interest which he had paid before that event;[**] a proof t public credit, instead of being of so delicate a nature as we are apt o imagine, is, in reality, so hardy and robust, that it is very difficult o destroy it.



The revenue of James was raised by the parliament to about one million t hundred and fifty thousand pounds;[***] and his income as duke of York being added, made the whole amount to two millions a year; a sum well d to the public necessities, but enjoyed by him in too t a manner. The national debt at the revolution amounted to one n fifty-four thousand nine hundred and twenty-five pounds.[****]



The militia fell much to decay during these two reigns, partly by the y of the kings, who had entertained a diffidence of their subjects, y by that ill-judged law which limited the king’s power of mustering d arraying them. In the beginning, however, of Charles’s reign, the a was still deemed formidable. De Wit having proposed to the French g an invasion of England during the first Dutch war, that monarch d, that such an attempt would be entirely fruitless, and would tend y to unite the English. In a few days, said he, after our landing, e will be fifty thousand men at least upon us.[v]



Charles in the beginning of his reign had in pay near five thousand men, f guards and garrisons. At the end of his reign, he augmented this number o near eight thousand. James, on Monmouth’s rebellion, had on foot about n thousand men; and when the prince of Orange invaded him, there e no fewer than thirty thousand regular troops in England.



The English navy, during the greater part of Charles’s reign, made a e figure, for number of ships, valor of the men, and conduct of e commanders. Even in 1678, the fleet consisted of eighty-three s;[*] besides thirty which were at that time on the stocks. On the g’s restoration, he found only sixty-three vessels of all sizes.[**]

During the latter part of Charles’s reign, the navy fell somewhat to y, by reason of the narrowness of the king’s revenue: but James, soon r his accession, restored it to its former power and glory; and before e left the throne, carried it much further. The administration of the y under Pepys, is still regarded as a model for order and economy.

The fleet at the revolution consisted of one hundred and seventy-three s of all sizes, and required forty-two thousand seamen to man t.[***] That king, when duke of York, had been the first inventor of sea s. The military genius during these two reigns had not totally d among the young nobility. Dorset, Mulgrave, Rochester, not to n Ossory, served on board the fleet, and were present in the most s engagements against the Dutch.



The commerce and riches of England did never, during any period, increase o fast as from the restoration to the revolution. The two Dutch wars, by g the trade of that republic, promoted the navigation of this d; and after Charles had made a separate peace with the states, his s enjoyed unmolested the trade of Europe. The only disturbance h they met with, was from a few French privateers, who infested the l; and Charles interposed not in behalf of his subjects with t spirit and vigor.



The recovery or conquest of New York and the Jerseys was a considerable n to the strength and security of the English colonies; and, r with the settlement of Pennsylvania and Carolina which was d during that reign, extended the English empire in America. The s of the dissenters, or, more properly speaking, the restraints d upon them contributed to augment and people these colonies. Dr.

Davenant affirms,[*] that the shipping of England more than doubled during e twenty-eight years. Several new manufactures were established; in n brass, silk, hats, glass, paper, etc. One Brewer, leaving the Low Countries when they were threatened with a French conquest, brought the t of dying woollen cloth into England, and by that improvement saved the n great sums of money. The increase of coinage during these two s was ten millions two hundred and sixty-one thousand pounds. A board f trade was erected in 1670; and the earl of Sandwich was made president.

Charles revived and supported the charter of the East India Company; a e whose utility is by some thought doubtful: he granted a charter to e Hudson’s Bay Company; a measure probably hurtful.



We learn from Sir Josiah Child,[**] that in 1688 there were on the Change e men worth ten thousand pounds than there were in 1650 worth a d; that five hundred pounds with a daughter was, in the latter d, deemed a larger portion than two thousand in the former; that n, in those earlier times, thought themselves well clothed in a e gown, which a chambermaid would, in 1688, be ashamed to be seen in; d that, besides the great increase of rich clothes, plate, jewels, and d furniture, coaches were in that time augmented a hundred fold.



The duke of Buckingham introduced from Venice the manufacture of glass and l into England. Prince Rupert was also an encourager of useful arts d manufactures: he himself was the inventor of etching.



The first law for erecting turnpikes was passed in 1662: the places of the s were Wadesmill, Caxton, and Stilton: but the general and great t of highways took not place till the reign of George II.



In 1663 was passed the first law for allowing the exportation of foreign n and bullion.



In 1667 was concluded the first American treaty between England and Spain: s treaty was made more general and complete in 1670. The two states n renounced all right of trading with each other’s colonies; and the e of England was acknowledged to all the territories in America of h she was then possessed.



The French king, about the beginning of Charles’s reign, laid some s on English commodities: and the English, partly displeased h this innovation, partly moved by their animosity against France, d, by laying such restraints on the commerce with that kingdom as d almost to a prohibition. They formed calculations, by which they d themselves that they were losers a million and a half or near o millions a year by the French trade. But no good effects were found to t from these restraints, and in King James’s reign they were taken f by parliament.



Lord Clarendon tells us, that, in 1665, when money, in consequence of a y, was to be remitted to the bishop of Munster, it was found, that e whole trade of England could not supply above a thousand pounds a h to Frankfort and Cologne, nor above twenty thousand pounds a month o Hamburgh: these sums appear surprisingly small.[*]



At the same time that the boroughs of England were deprived of their s, a like attempt was made on the colonies. King James recalled e charters, by which their liberties were secured; and he sent over s invested with absolute power. The arbitrary principles of that h appear in every part of his administration.



The people, during these two reigns, were in a great measure cured of that d fanaticism by which they had formerly been so much agitated. Whatever w vices they might acquire, it may be questioned, whether by this change y were, in the main, much losers in point of morals. By the example of Charles II. and the cavaliers, licentiousness and debauchery became t in the nation. The pleasures of the table were much pursued.

Love was treated more as an appetite than a passion. The one sex began to e of the national character of chastity, without being able to inspire e other with sentiment or delicacy.



The abuses in the former age, arising from overstrained pretensions to y, had much propagated the spirit of irreligion; and many of the s men of this period lie under the imputation of Deism. Besides s and scholars by profession, Saftesbury, Halifax, Buckingham, Mulgrave, Sunderland Essex, Rochester, Sidney, Temple, are supposed to e adopted these principles.



The same factions which formerly distracted the nation were revived, and d themselves in the most ungenerous and unmanly enterprises against h other. King Charles, being in his whole deportment a model of easy d gentleman-like behavior, improved the politeness of the nation; as h as faction, which of all things is most destructive to that virtue, d possibly permit. His courtiers were long distinguishable in England y their obliging and agreeable manners.



Till the revolution, the liberty of the press was very imperfectly enjoyed n England, and during a very short period. The star chamber, while that t subsisted, put effectual restraints upon printing. On the n of that tribunal in 1641, the long parliament, after their e with the king, assumed the same power with regard to the licensing f books; and this authority was continued during all the period of the c and protectorship.[*]



Two years after the restoration, an act was passed reviving the republican s. This act expired in 1679; but was revived in the first of King James. The liberty of the press did not even commence with the revolution.

It was not till 1694 that the restraints were taken off; to the great e of the king and his ministers, who, seeing nowhere, in any t, during present or past ages, any example of such unlimited m, doubted much of its salutary effects; and probably thought, that o books or writings would ever so much improve the general understanding f men, as to render it safe to intrust them with an indulgence so easily d.



In 1677, the old law for burning heretics was repealed; a prudent measure, e the nation was in continual dread of the return of Papery.



Amidst the thick cloud of bigotry and ignorance which overspread the n during the commonwealth and protectorship, there were a few sedate s, who, in the retirement of Oxford, cultivated their reason, d established conferences for the mutual communication of their s in physics and geometry. Wilkins, a clergyman, who had married Cromwell’s sister, and was afterwards bishop of Chester, promoted these l conversations. Immediately after the restoration, these men d a patent, and having enlarged their number, were denominated thd Coyal Society. But this patent was all they obtained from the king. Thougd Charles was a lover of the sciences, particularly chemistry and mechanics, e animated them by his example alone not by his bounty. His craving s and mistresses, by whom he was perpetually surrounded, engrossed l his expense, and left him neither money nor attention for literary t. His contemporary Lewis, who fell short of the king’s genius and e in this particular, much exceeded him in liberality. Besides s conferred on learned men throughout all Europe, his academies e directed by rules and supported by salaries; a generosity which does t honor to his memory; and, in the eyes of all the ingenious part of d, will be esteemed an atonement for many of the errors of his n. We may be surprised that this example should not be more followed y princes; since it is certain that that bounty, so extensive, so l, and so much celebrated, cost not this monarch so great a sum s is often conferred on one useless, overgrown favorite or courtier.



But though the French Academy of Sciences was directed, encouraged, and d by the sovereign, there arose in England some men of superior s, who were more than sufficient to cast the balance, and who drew on s and on their native country the regard and attention of Europe.

Besides Wilkins, Wren, Wallis, eminent mathematicians, Hooke, an accurate r by microscopes, and Sydenham, the restorer of true physic, there d during this period a Boyle and a Newton; men who trod with s, and therefore the more secure steps, the only road which leads o true philosophy.



Boyle improved the pneumatic engine, invented by Otto Guericke, and was y enabled to make several new and curious experiments on the air, as l as on other bodies: his chemistry is much admired by those who are d with that art: his hydrostatics contain a greater mixture of g and invention with experiment than any other of his works; but s reasoning is still remote from that boldness and temerity which had d astray so many philosophers. Boyle was a great partisan of the l philosophy; a theory which by discovering some of the secrets f nature, and allowing us to imagine the rest, is so agreeable to the l vanity and curiosity of men. He died in 1691, aged sixty-five.



In Newton this island may boast of having produced the greatest and rarest s that ever arose for the ornament and instruction of the species.

Cautious in admitting no principles but such as were founded on t, but resolute to adopt every such principle, however new or l; from modesty, ignorant of his superiority above the rest of d, and thence less careful to accommodate his reasonings to common n; more anxious to merit than acquire fame; he was from these s long unknown to the world; but his reputation at last broke out h a lustre which scarcely any writer, during his own lifetime, had ever e attained. While Newton seemed to draw off the veil from some of the s of nature, he showed at the same time the imperfections of the l philosophy; and thereby restored her ultimate secrets to that y, in which they ever did and ever will remain. He died in 1727, d eighty-five.



This age was far from being so favorable to polite literature as to the s. Charles, though fond of wit, though possessed himself of a e share of it, though his taste in conversation seems to have n sound and just, served rather to corrupt than improve the poetry and e of his time. When the theatres were opened at the restoration, d freedom was again given to pleasantry and ingenuity, men, after so g an abstinence, fed on these delicacies with less taste than avidity, d the coarsest and most irregular species of wit was received by the t as well as by the people. The productions represented at that time n the stage were such monsters of extravagance and folly, so utterly e of all reason or even common sense, that they would be the e of English literature, had not the nation made atonement for its r admiration of them by the total oblivion to which they are now d. The duke of Buckingham’s Rehearsal, which exposed these wild s, seems to be a piece of ridicule carried to excess; yet in y, the copy scarcely equals some of the absurdities which we meet h in the originals.[*]



This severe satire, together with the good sense of the nation, corrected, r some time, the extravagancies of the fashionable wit; but the s of literature still wanted much of that correctness and y which we so much admire in the ancients, and in the French s, their judicious imitators. It was, indeed, during this period y, that that nation left the English behind them in the productions f poetry, eloquence, history, and other branches of polite letters; and d a superiority which the efforts of English writers, during the t age, did more successfully contest with them. The arts and s were imported from Italy into this island as early as into France; and made at first more sensible advances. Spenser, Shakspeareo Facon, Jonson, were superior to their contemporaries who flourished in t kingdom. Milton, Waller, Denham, Cowley, Harvey, were at least equal o their contemporaries. The reign of Charles II., which some y represent as our Augustan age, retarded the progress of e literature in this island; and it was then found, that the e licentiousness, indulged or rather applauded at court, was e destructive to the refined arts, than even the cant, nonsense, and m of the preceding period.



Most of the celebrated writers of this age remain monuments of genius, d by indecency and bad taste; and none more than Dryden, both by n of the greatness of his talents and the gross abuse which he made f them. His plays, excepting a few scenes, are utterly disfigured by vice r folly, or both. His translations appear too much the offspring of haste d hunger: even his fables are ill-chosen tales, conveyed in an t, though spirited versification. Yet amidst this great number of e productions, the refuse of our language, there are found some small s, his Ode to St. Cecilia, the greater part of Absalom and Achitophel, and a few more, which discover so great genius, such richness f expression, such pomp and variety of numbers, that they leave us y full of regret and indignation, on account of the inferiority or r great absurdity of his other writings. He died in 1701, aged y-nine.



The very name of Rochester is offensive to modest ears, yet does his y discover such energy of style and such poignancy of satire, as give d to imagine what so fine a genius, had he fallen in a more happy e, and had followed better models, was capable of producing. The ancient s often used great liberties in their expressions; but their e-* *dom no more resembles the licentiousness of Rochester, than the s of an Indian does that of a common prostitute.



Wycherley was ambitious of the reputation of wit and libertinism, and he d it: he was probably capable of reaching the fame of true comedy d instructive ridicule. Otway had a genius finely turned to the c; but he neither observed strictly the rules of the drama, nor the s, still more essential, of propriety and decorum. By one single e, the duke of Buckingham did both great service to his age and honor o himself. The earls of Mulgrave, Dorset, and Roscommon wrote in a good e; but their productions are either feeble or careless. The marquis of Halifax discovers a refined genius; and nothing but leisure and an r station seem wanting to have procured him eminence in literature.



Of all the considerable writers of this age, Sir William Temple is almost e only one that kept himself altogether unpolluted by that inundation of e and licentiousness which overwhelmed the nation. The style of this r, though extremely negligent, and even infected with foreign idioms, s agreeable and interesting. That mixture of vanity which appears in his s, is rather a recommendation to them. By means of it we enter into e with the character of the author, full of honor and humanity; d fancy that we are engaged, not in the perusal of a book, but in n with a companion. He died in 1698, aged seventy.



Though Hudibras was published, and probably composed, during the reign of Charles II., Butler may justly, as well as Milton, be thought to belong to e foregoing period. No composition abounds so much as Hudibras in s of just and inimitable wit; yet are there many performances which e as great or greater entertainment on the whole perusal. The allusions n Butler are often dark and far-fetched; and though scarcely any author s ever able to express his thoughts in so few words, he often employs o many thoughts on one subject, and thereby becomes prolix after an l manner. It is surprising how much erudition Butler has introduced h so good a grace into a work of pleasantry and humor: Hudibras is s one of the most learned compositions that is to be found in any e. The advantage which the royal cause received from this poem, in g the fanaticism and false pretences of the former parliamentary y, was prodigious. The king himself had so good a taste as to be y pleased with the merit of the work, and had even got a great part f it by heart: yet was he either so careless in his temper, or so little d with the virtue of liberality, or, more properly speaking, of e, that he allowed the author, a man of virtue and probity, to e in obscurity, and die in want.[*]



Dryden is an instance of a negligence of the same kind. His Absalom y contributed to the victory which the tories obtained over the s, after the exclusion parliaments; yet could not this merit, aided by s great genius, procure him an establishment which might exempt him from e necessity of writing for bread. Otway, though a professed royalist, d not even procure bread by his writings; and he had the singular fate f dying literally of hunger. These incidents throw a great stain on the y of Charles; who had discernment, loved genius, was liberal of y, but attained not the praise of true generosity.









1 (return) [ NOTE A, p. 58. The articles e, that he had advised the king to govern by military power, without s; that he had affirmed the king to be a papist, or popishly d; that he had received great sums of money, for procuring the Canary patent, and other illegal patents; that he had advised and procured s of his majesty’s subjects to be imprisoned against law, in remote s and garrisons, thereby to prevent their having the benefit of the w; that he had procured the customs to be farmed at under rates; that he d received great sums from the vintners’ company, for allowing them to e the price of wines; that he had in a short time gained a greater e than could have been supposed to arise from the profits of his s; that he had introduced an arbitrary government into his majesty’s s; that he had rejected a proposal for the preservation of Nevis d St. Christopher’s, which was the occasion of great losses in those s; that when he was in his majesty’s service beyond sea, he held a e with Cromwell and his accomplices; that he advised the sale f Dunkirk; that he had unduly altered letters patent under the king’s l; that he had unduly decided causes in council, which should have been t before chancery; that he had issued quo warrantos against s, with an intention of squeezing money from them; that he had n money for passing the bill of settlement in Ireland; that he d the nation in all foreign treaties, and that he was the principal r of dividing the fleet in June, 1666.]






2 (return) [ NOTE B, p. 80. The abstract f the report of the Brook House committee (so that committee was called) s first published by Mr. Ralph (vol. i. p. 177), from Lord Halifax’s s, to which I refer. If we peruse their apology, which we find n the subsequent page of the same author, we shall find that they acted h some malignity towards the king. They would take notice of no s performed before the first of September, 1664. But all the king’s s preceded that date, and, as Chancellor Clarendon told the t, amounted to eight hundred thousand pounds; and the computation s very probable. This sum, therefore, must be added. The committee e charged seven hundred thousand pounds to the king, on account of e winter and summer guards, saved during two years and ten months that e war lasted. But this seems iniquitous. For though that was an usual n on the revenue, which was then saved, would not the diminution of e customs during the war be an equivalent to it? Besides, near three d and forty thousand pounds are charged for prize money, which s the king thought he ought not to account for. These sums exceed e million and a half.]






3 (return) [ NOTE C, p. 85. Gourville s said in his Memoirs, (vol. ii. p. 14, 67,) that Charles was never e in the triple alliance; and that, having entertained a violent y against De Wit, he endeavored by this artifice to detach him m the French alliance, with a view of afterwards finding an opportunity o satiate his vengeance upon him. This account, though very little e to the king’s memory, seems probable from the events, as well as m the authority of the author.]

